BONJOUR TRISTESSE 


This first novel by Fran^oise Sagan was awarded tlie 
Grand Prix des Critiques and is an international best- 
seller. Told in the^irst person, it is the story of a girl 
who has )ust left school to live with her father, an 
attractive widower, a pleasant and sophisticated 
hedonist, who cannot exist without his women friends. 
Their carefree existejice is changed when a friend of 
the girl’s dead mother comes to stay, falls in love with 
the father and decides to inairy him and thus ensure 
a respectable bourgeois life for both father and daughter. 
The crisis of the story is contained in the impart of 
these two characters: the elegant, charming woman, 
who believes in a more ordered way of life, and the girl, 
who admires her, but who is so determined to main- 
tain their freedom that she fmds herself opposed to the 
marriage. In the working out of the situation the 
author, who was only eighteen when she wrote the 
book, shows remarkabk perception and subtlety in 
handling a most complex emotional situation. 



by th( satnc author 

A CERTAIN SMILE 

THOSE WITHOUl SHADOWS 
(in French Dam un Afots Dans un 4n) 



Bonjour 

Tristesse 

. A NOVEL BY 

FRANCOISE SAGAN 

★ 

TRANSLATED BY 



First Published May 1915 


Made and p? inted in Great Britain by 
Butler dr Tanner Ltd , Frame and London 
and published by John Murray {Publishers) Ltd. 



Adieu tristessc 
Bonjour tristesse 

Tu es inscrite dans Ics lignes da plafoud 

Tu es inscrite dans les ycux que paime 

Tu n^es pas tout d fait la misere 

Car les levrcs les plus pauvres te denonccnt 

Par un sourire 

Bonjour tristessp 

Amour des corps mmables 

Puissance de V amour 

Dont Vamabilite surgU 

Comme un monstre sans corps 

Tete disappointee 

Tristesse beau lisage. 


P. Kluard 
(La vie immediate) 




Part One 




1 


A strange melancholy pervades me to which 
I hesitate to give the grave and beautiful 
L name of sadness. In tJie past the idea of 
sadness always appealed to me, now I am almost 
ashamed of its complete egoism. I had known bore- 
dom, regret, and at times remorse, but never sad- 
ness. To-day something envelops me like a silken 
web, enervating and soft, which isolates me. 

That summer I was seventeen and perfectly 
happy. I lived with my ^ather, and there was also 
Elsa, who for the time being was his mistress. I 
must explain this situation at once, or it might give 
a false impression. My father was forty, and had 
been a widower for fifteen years. He was young 
for his age, full of vitality and possibilities, and when 
I left school two years before, I soon noticed that he 
lived with a woman. It took me rather longer to 
realise that it was a different one every six months. 
But gradually his charm, my new easy life, and my 
own disposition led me to accept it. He was a 
frivolous man, clever at business, always curious, 
quickly bored, and attractive to women. It was 
easy to love him, for he was kind, generous, gay, 



and full of affection for me. I cdiinot imagine a 
better or a more amusing friend. At the begin- 
ning of the summer he even went so far as to ask 
me whether I would object to Elsa’s company during 
the holidays. She was a tall led-haired girl, sen- 
sual and worldly, gentle, ratlier simple, and unpre- 
tentious j one might have come across her any day 
in the studios and bars of the Champs-Elys^es. I 
encouraged him to invite her. He needed women 
around him, and I knew that Elsa would not get 
in our way. In any case my father and I were so 
delighted at the prospect of going away together 
that we weie in no mood to cavil at anytliing. He 
had rented a laige white villa on the Mediterranean, 
for which we had been loAgiiig since the spring. It 
was remote and beautiful, and stood on a pro- 
montory dominating the sea, hidden from the road 
by a pine wood^ a mule path led down to a tiny 
creek wheie the sea lapped against rust-coloured 
rocks. 

The first days were dazzling We spent hours 
on the beach ovci whelmed by the heat and gradu- 
ally assuming a healthy golden tan 5 except Elsa, 
whose skin reddened and peeled, causing her atro- 
cious suffering. My father performed all sorts of 
complicated leg exercises to reduce a rounding 
stomach unsuitable for a Don Juan. From dawn 
onwards I was in the water. It was cool and trans- 

4 



parent, and I plunged wildly about in my efforts to 
wash away the shadows and dust of the city. I lay 
full length on the sand, took up a handful and let it 
run tlirough my fingers in soft yellow streams. I 
told myself that it ran out like time. It Y'^as an idle 
thought, and it was pleasant to liave idle thoughts, 
for it was summer. 

On the sixth day *1 saw Cyril. He was sailing a 
small boat which capsized in front of our creek. We 
had a good deal cl fun rescuing his possessions, dur- 
ing which he told me Jiis name, that he was studying 
law, and was spending his holidays with his mother 
in a neiglibouring villa. He looked typically Latin, 
and was very dark and sunburnt. There was some- 
thing reliable and protective about him which I 
liked at once. Usually I avoided university students, 
whom I considered rough, and only interested in 
themselves and their own problems, which they 
dramatised, or used as an excuse for their boredom. 
I did not care for young people, but much preferred 
my father’s friends, men of forty, who spoke to me 
with courtesy and tenderness, and treated me with 
the gentleness of a father or a lover. 

Cyril was different. He was tall and some- 
times beautiful, with the sort of good looks that 
immediately inspire one with confidence. Al- 
though I did not share my father’s aversion to ugli- 
ness, which often led us to associate with stupid 

5 



people, I felt vaguely uncomfortable with anyone 
devoid of physical charms. Their resignation to the 
fact that they were unattractive seomed to me some- 
how indecent. 

When ^Jyril left he offereo tx» teach me to sail. 
I went up to dinner absorbed by my thoughts and 
hardly joined in the conversation; neither did I pay 
much attention to my father’s* nervousness. After 
dinner we lay in chairs on the terrace as usual. 
The sky was studded with stars. I gazed upwards, 
vaguely hoping to see a suddep, exciting flash across 
the heavens, but it was early in July and too soon for 
meteors. On the terrace the crickets were chirrup- 
ing. There must have been thousands of them, 
drunk with heat and moonlight, pouring out their 
strange song all night long. I had been told they 
were only rubbing their wing-cases together, but I 
preferred to believe that it came from the throat, 
guttural and instinctive like the purr of a cat. We 
were very comfortable. Only some tiny grains of 
sand between my skin and my shirt kept me from 
dropping off to sleep. Suddenly my father coughed 
apologetically and sat up. 

“ Someone is coming to stay,” he announced. 

I shut my eyes tightly. We were too peaceful, 
it just couldn’t last ! 

“Hurry up and tell us who it is!” cried Elsa, 
always avid for gossip. 

6 



“Anne Larsen,” said my father, and he turned 
towards me. 

1 could hardly believe my ears. Anne was the 
last person I would have thought of. She had been 
a friend of my mother’s, and had very little con- 
tact with my father. But all the same, when I left 
school two years before and my father was at his 
wits’ end about me, he had asked her to take me 
in hand. Within a week she had dressed me in the 
right clothes and taught me something of life. I 
remember thinking her the most wonderful person 
and being quite embarrassingly fond of her, but she 
soon found me a young man to whom I could trans- 
fer my affections. To her I owed my first glimpse 
of elegance and my first ilirtation, and I was very 
grateful. At forty-two she was a most attractive 
woman, much sought after, with a beautiful face, 
proud, tired and indifferent. This indifference was 
the only complaint one could make against her: she 
was amiable and distant. Everything about her 
denoted a strong will and an inner serenity which 
were disconcerting. Although divorced, she seemed 
to have no attachments} but then we did not know 
the same people. Her friends were clever, intelli- 
gent and discreet} ours, from whom my father 
demanded only good looks or amusement, were noisy 
and insatiable. I think she rather despised us for our 
love of diversion and frivolity, as she despised all 

B.T. — 2 7 



extremes. We had few points of contact: she was 
concerned with fashion and my father with pub- 
licity, so they met occasionally at business dinners; 
then there was the memory of my mother, and 
lastly my own determined ’efforts to keep in touch, 
because although she intimidated me, I greatly 
admired her. In short, her sudden arrival appeared 
disastrous in view of Elsa’s presence and Anne’s 
ideas on education. 

Elsa went up to bed after making close enquiries 
about Anne’s social position. I remained alone with 
my father and moved to the steps, where I sat at his 
feet. He leaned forward and laid his hands on my 
shoulders. 

“Why are you so thiu, darling? You look like 
a little wild cat. I’d rather have a beautiful fair- 
haired daughter, a bit plump, with china-blue eyes 
and ...” 

“That’s hardly the point,” I said. “What made 
you invite Anne, and why did she accept?” 

“Perhaps she wants to see your old father, one 
never knows.” 

“You’re not the type of man who interests 
Anne,” I said. “ She’s too intelligent and thinks too 
much of herself. And what about Elsa, have 
you thought of her ? Can you imagine a conversa- 
tion between Elsa and Anne ? I can’t! ” 

“I’m afraid it hadn’t occurred to me,” he con- 


8 



fessed. “But you’re right, it’s a dreadful thought! 
Cdcile, my sweet, shall we go back to Paris?” 

He laughed softly and rubbed the back of my 
neck. I turned to look at him. His dark eyes 
gleamed, funny little wrinkles marked tljeir edges, 
his mouth turned up slightly. He looked like a 
faun. I laughed with him as I always did when he 
created complications for himself. 

“My little accomplice,” he said. “What would 
I do without yoo ?” 

from the tender inflection of his voice I knew that 
he would really have been unhappy. Late into the 
night we talked of love, of its complications. In my 
father’s eyes they were imaginary. He refused 
categorically all notions ol^ fidelity and serious com- 
mitments. He explained that they were arbitrary 
and sterile. From anyone else such views would 
have shocked me, but I knew that in his case they 
did not exclude either tenderness or devotion j feel- 
ings which came all the more easily to him since 
he was determined that they should be transient. 
Tliis conception of rapid, violent and passing love 
affairs appealed to my imagination. I was not at 
the age when fidelity is attractive. I knew very 
little about love. 



2 


Anne was not due for another week, and I 
made the most of these last days of real free- 
^ A. dom. We had rentec^ the villa for two 
months, but I knew that once she had come it would 
be impossible for any of us to relax completely. 
Anne gave a shape to things arid a meaning to words 
that my father and I preferred to ignore. She 
set a standard of good taste and fastidiousness 
which one could not help noticing in her sudden 
withdrawals, her expressidns, and her pained silences. 
It was both stimulating and exhausting, but in the 
long run humiliating, because I could not help 
feeling that she was right. 

On the day of her arrival we decided that my 
father and Elsa should meet her at the station in 
Frdjus. I absolutely refused to go with them. In 
desperation my father cut all the gladioli in the 
garden to offer her as soon as she got off the train. 
My only advice to him was not to allow Elsa to carry 
the bouquet. After they had left 1 went down to 
the beach. It was three o’clock and the heat was 
overpowering. I was lying on the sand half asleep 
when I heard Cyril’s voice. I opened my eyes: the 

10 



sky was white, shimmering with heat. I made 
no reply, because I did not want to speak to him, 
nor to anyone. I was nailed to the sand by all the 
forces of summer. 

“ Are you dead ? ” he said. “ From over there you 
looked as if you had been washed up by the sea.” 

I smiled. He sat down near me and my heart 
began to beat faster because his hand had just 
touched my shoulder. A dozen times during the 
past week my biilliant seamanship had precipitated 
us into the water, <vir arms entwined, and I had 
not felt the least twinge of excitement, but to-day 
the heat, my half-sleep, and an inadvertent move- 
ment had somehow broken down my defences. We 
looked at each other. I Vas getting to know him 
better. He was steady, and more restrained than is 
perhaps usual at his age. For this reason our cir- 
cumstances — our unusual trio — shocked him. He 
was too kind or too timid to tell me, but I felt it in 
the oblique looks of recrimination he gave my 
father. He would have liked to know that I was 
tormented by our situation, but I was notj in fact 
my only torment at that moment was the way my 
heart was thiunping. He bent over me. I thought 
of the past few days, of my feeling of peace and 
confidence when 1 was with him, and I regretted 
the approach of that wide and rather full mouth. 

“Cyril,” I said. “We were so happy. ...” 


11 



He kissed me gently. I looked at the sky, then 
saw nothing but lights bursting under my closed 
eyelids. The warmth, dizziness, and the taste of 
our first kisses continued for long moments. The 
sound of j motor-horn sepa*'ated us like thieves. I 
left Cyril without a word and went up to the house. 
I was surprised by their quick return j Anne’s train 
could hardly have arrived yet. Nevertheless I 
found her on the terrace just getting out of a car. 

“This is like the house of the Sleeping Beauty!” 
she said. , 

“How brown you are, C^cile' I am so pleased 
to see you.” 

“I too,” I answered, “but have you just come 
from Paris?” 

“I preferred to drive down, and by the way, I’m 
worn out.” 

I showed her to her room and opened the window 
in the hope of seeing Cyril’s boat, but it had dis- 
appeared. Anne sat down on the bed. I noticed 
little shadows round her eyes. 

“What a delightful villa!” she said. “Where’s 
the master of the house ? ” 

“He’s gone to meet you at the station with 
Elsa.” 

I had put her suitcase on a chair, and when I 
turned round I received a shock. Her face had 
suddenly collapsed, her mouth was trembling. 

J2 



“Elisa Mackenbourg? He broiight Elisa Macken- 
bourg here?” 

I could not think of anything to reply. I looked 
at her, absolutely stupefied. Was that really the 
face I had always seen so calm and controlled ? . . . 
She stared at me, but 1 saw she was contemplating 
my words. When at last she noticed me she turned 
her head away. 

“I ought to have let you know sooner,” she said, 
“ but I was in such a hurry to get away and so tired.” 

“And now ...” I continued mechanically. 

“Now what?” she said. 

Her expression was interrogatory, disdainful, as 
though nothing had taken place. 

“Well, now you’ve arHved!” I said stupidly, 
rubbing my hands together. “You can’t think 
how pleased I am that you’re here. I’ll wait for 
you downstairs} if you’d like anything to drink the 
bar is very well stocked.” 

Talking incoherently I left the room and went 
downstairs with my thoughts in a turmoil. What 
was the reason for that expression, that worried 
voice, that sudden despondency? I sat on the sofa 
and closed my eyes. I tried to remember Anne’s 
various faces: hard, reassuring; her expressions of 
irony, ease, authority. I found myself both moved 
and irritated by the discovery that she was vulner- 
able. Was she in love with my father? Was it 

15 



possible for her to be in love ? He was not at all her 
type. He was weak, friyolous, and sometimes un- 
reliable. But perhaps it was only the fatigue of the 
journey, or moral indignation? I spent an hour 
in vain co^jectme. 

At five o’clock my father arrived with Elsa. I 
watched him getting out of the car. I wondered 
if Anne could ever love him? He walked quickly 
towards me, his head tilted a little backwards; he 
smiled. Of course it was quite possible for Anne 
to love him, for anyone to lovp him! 

“Anne wasn’t there,” he called to me. “I hope 
she hasn’t fallen out of the train 1 ” 

“She’s in her room,” I said. “She came in her 
car.” 

“No? Splendid! Then all you have to do is to 
take up the bouquet.” 

“Did you buy me some flowers?” called Anne’s 
voice. “ How sweet of you ! ” 

She came down the stairs to meet him, cool, 
smiling, in a dress that did not seem to have 
travelled. I reflected sadly how she had appeared 
only when she heard the car, and that she might 
have done so a little sooner to talk to me; even if it 
had been about my examination, in which, by the 
way, I had failed. This leist thought consoled 
me. 

My father rushed up to her and kissed her hand. 


14 



“I spent a quarter of an hour on the station plat- 
form, holding this bunch of flowers, and feeling 
utterly foolish. Thank goodness you’re here ! Do 
you know Elsa Mackenbourg?” 

I averted my eyes. 

“We must have met,” said Anne, all amiability. 
“What a lovely room I have. It was most kind of 
you to invite me, Raymond 5 I was feeling very 
exhausted.” 

My father gave a snort of pleasure. In his eyts 
everything was going well. He made conversation, 
uncorked bottles ; but I kept thinking, first of Cyril’s 
passionate face, and then of Anne’s, both with the 
stamp of violence on them, and I wondered if the 
holidays would be as unfiomplicated as my father 
had predicted. 

This first dinner was very gay. My father and 
Anne talked of the friends they had in common, 
who were few, but highly colourful. I was enjoy- 
ing myself up to the moment when Anne declared 
that my father’s business partner was an idiot. He 
was a man who drank a lot, but I liked him very 
much, and my father and I had had memorable 
meals in his company. 

“But Anne,” I protested. “Lombard is most 
amusing; he can even be very funny.” 

“All the same, you must admit that he’s some- 
what lacking, and as for his brand of humour . . . ” 

15 



“He has perhaps not a veiy brilliant form of 
intelligence, but ...” 

She interrupted me with an air of condescen- 
sion: 

“Wliat you call ‘forms’ cf intelligence are only 
degrees.” 

I was delighted with her dear-cut definition. 
Certain phrases fascinate me wit^ their subtle impli- 
cations, even though I may not always understand 
their meaning. I told Anne that I wdshed I could 
have written it down in my notebook. My father 
burst out laughing; 

“At least you bear no resentment!” 

How could I when Anne was not malevolent ? I 
felt that she was too oAnpletely indifferent, her 
judgements had not the precision, the sharp edge of 
spite, and so were all the more effective. 

The first evening Anne did not seem to notice that 
EJsa went quite openly into my father’s bedroom. 
She had brought me a jersey from her collection, 
but would not accept any thanks; it only bored her 
to be thanked, she said, and as I was anyhow shy 
of expressing enthusiasm, I was most relieved. 

“I think Elsa is very nice,” she remarked as I 
was about to leave the room. 

She looked straight at me without a smile, seek- 
ing something in me which at all cost she wished to 
eradicate : I was to forget her earlier reaction. 

16 



“Oh yes, she’s a charming girl . . . very sym- 
pathique^' I stammered. 

She began to laugh, and I went up to bed, most 
upset. I fell asleep thinking of Cyril, probably 
dancing in Cannes with girls. 

I realise that I have forgotten an important factor 
— ^the presence of the sea with its incessant rhythm. 
Neither have I remembered the four lime trees in 
the courtyard of a school in Provence, and their 
scent} and my father’s smile on the station platform 
three years ago when I left school, his embarrassed 
smile because I had plaits and wore an ugly dark 
dress. And then in the car his sudden triumphant 
joy because I had his eyes, his mouth, and I was 
going to be for him the Nearest, most marvellous 
of toys. 1 knew nothing} he was going to show me 
Paris, luxury, the easy life. I dare say I owed most 
of my pleasures of that time to money } the pleasure 
of driving fast, of having a new dress, buying 
records, books, flowers. Even now I am not 
ashamed of indulging in these pleasures, in fact I 
just take them for granted. I would rather deny 
myself my moods of mysticism or despair than give 
them up. My love of pleasure seems to be the 
only coherent side of my character. Perhaps it is 
because I have not read enough? At school one 
only reads edifying works. In Paris there was no 
time for reading: after lectures my friends hurried 

17 



me off to cinemas; they were surprised to find that 
I did not even know the actors’ names. I sat on 
sunny cafd terraces, I savoured the pleasure of drift- 
ing along with the crowds, of having a drink, of 
being with someone who loi^ks into your eyes, holds 
your hand, and then leads you far away from those 
same crowds. We would walk slowly home, there 
under a doorway he would draw me dose and em- 
brace me: I found out how pleasant it was to be 
kissed. In the evenings I grew older: I went to 
parties with my father. They were very mixed 
parties, and I was rather out of place, but I enjoyed 
myself, and the fact that I was so young seemed to 
amuse everyone. When we left, my father would 
drop me at our flat, and*’then see his friend home. 
I never heard him come in. 

I do not want to give the impression that he was 
vain about his affairs, but he made no effort to hide 
them from me, or to invent stories in order to justify 
the frequent presence at breakfast of a particular 
friend, not even if she became a member of our 
hoiisehold (fortunately only temporarily!). In any 
case I would soon have discovered the nature of his 
relations with his ‘ guests ’, and probably he found it 
easier to be frank than to take the trouble to deceive 
me, and thereby lose my confidence. His only 
fault was that he imbued me with a cynical attitude 
towards love which, considering my age and 

18 



inexperience, should have meant happiness and 
not only a transitoiy sensation. I was fond of 
repeating to myself sayings like Oscar Wilde’s : 

“Sin is the only note of vivid colour that persists 
in the modern world.” 

I made it my own wi^th far more conviction, I think, 
than if I had put it into practice. I believed that 
I could base my life on it. 


19 



3 


T he next morning I was awakened by a slant- 
ing ray of hot sunshine that flooded iny bed 
and put an end to my strange and rather con- 
fused dreams. Still lialf asleep I raised my hand 
to shield my face from the insistent heat, then gave 
it up. It was ten o’clock. , I went down to the 
terrace in my p^^jamas and found Anne glancing 
through the newspapers. I noticed that she was 
lightly, but perfectly, made up 5 apparently she never 
allowed herself a real •Holiday. As she paid no 
attention to me, I sat down on the steps with a cup 
of coffee and an orange to enjoy the delicious morn- 
ing. I bit the orange and let its sweet juice run into 
my moutli, then took a gulp of scalding black coffee 
and went back to the orange again. The sun 
warmed my hair and smoothed away the marks of 
the sheet on my skin. I thought in five minutes I 
would go and bathe. Anne’s voice made me 
jump: 

“Cdcile, aren’t you eating anything?” 

“I prefer just a drink in the morning.” 

•‘To look presentable you ought to put on six 




every rib. Do go in and fetch yourself some bread 
and butter ! ” 

I begged her not to force me to eat, and she was 
just explaining how important it was when my 
father appeared in his sumptuous spotted dressing- 
gown. 

“What a charming spectacle,” he said, “two 
little girls sunning themselves and discussing bread 
and butter.” 

“Unfortunately there’s only one little girl,” said 
Anne, laughing. “I’m your age, my dear Ray- 
mond!” 

“Caustic as ever!” he said gently, and I saw 
Anne’s eyelids flutter as if she liad received an 
unexpected caress. ” 

I slipped away unnoticed. On the stairs I passed 
Elisa. She was obviously just out of bed, with 
swollen eyelids, pale lips, and her skin crimson 
from too much sun. I almost stopped her to say 
that Anne was downstairs, her face trim and im- 
maculate; that she would be careful to tan slowly 
and without damage. I nearly put her on her 
guard, but probably she would have taken it 
badly: she was twenty-nine, thirteen years younger 
than Anne, and that seemed to her a master 
trump. 

I fetched my bathing suit and ran to the creek. 
To my surprise Cyril was already there, silting on 

21 



his boat. He came to meet me looking serious, and 
took my hands. 

“ I wanted to beg your pardon for yesterday,” he 
said. 

“It was my fault,” I replied, wondering why he 
was so solemn. 

“I’m very annoyed with myself,” he went on, 
pushing the boat into the water. 

“There’s no reason to be,” I said lightly. 

“But I am!” 

I was already in the boat. He was standing in 
the water up to his knees, resting his hands on the 
gunwale as if it were the beu* of a tribunal. I 
knew his face well enough to read his expression 
and realised that he wotfid not join me until he had 
said what was on his mind. It made me laugh to 
think that at twenty-five he saw himself as a 
seducer. 

“ Don’t laugh,” he said, “ I really meant it. You 
have no protection against me. Look at the ex- 
ample of your father and that woman! I might 
be the most awful cad for all you know.” 

He was not at all ridiculous. I thought he was 
kind, already half in love with me, and that it 
would be nice to be in love with him too. I put 
my arms round his neck and my cheek against his. 
He had broad shoulders and his body felt hard 
against mine. 

22 



“ You’re very sweet, Cyril,” I murmured. “ You 
shall be a brother to me.” 

He folded his arms round me with an angry 
little exclamation, and gently pulled me out of the 
boat. He held me close against him, my head on 
his shoulder. At that moment I loved him. In 
the morning light he was as golden, as soft, as gentle 
as myself. He was protecting me. As his lips 
touched mine we both began to tremble, and the 
pleasure of oui- kiss was untinged by shame or 
regret, merely a deep searching interrupted every 
now and then by whispers. I broke away and 
swam towards the boat, which was drifting out. I 
dipped my face into the water to refresh it. The 
water was green. A feeling of reckless happiness 
came over me. 

At half-past eleven Cyril left, and my father and 
his women appeared on the mule path. He walked 
between the two, supporting them, offering his 
hand to each in turn with a charm and naturalness 
all his own. Anne had kept on her beach wrap. 
She removed it with complete unconcern, while 
we all w atched her, and lay down on the sand. She 
had a small w^aist and perfect legs, and, no doubt as 
the result of a lifetime of care and attention, her 
body was almost without a blemish. Involuntarily 
I glanced at my father, raising an eyebrow of 
approval. To my great siu-prise he did not respond, 

B.T — 5 23 



but closed his eyes. Poor Elsa, who was in b 
lamentable condition, was busy oiling herself. 1 
did not think my father would stand her for another 
week. . . . Anne turned her head towards me : 

“C^ile, why do you get up so early here? In 
Paris you stayed in bed until mid-day.” 

“I was working,” I said. “It made my legs 
ache.” 

She did not smile. She only smiled when she 
felt like it, never out of politeness, like other 
people. 

“And your exam?” 

“Ploughed!” I said brightly. “Well and truly 
ploughed.” 

“ But you must pass it In October.” 

“Why should she?” my father interrupted. “I 
never got any diplomas and I live a life of luxmy.” 

“You had quite a fortime to start with,” Anne 
reminded him. 

“ My daughter will always find men to look after 
her,” said my father grandiloquently. 

Elsa began to laugh, but stopped when she saw 
our three faces. 

“She will have to work during the holidays,” said 
Anne, shutting her eyes to put an end to the 
conversation. 

I gave my father a despairing look, but he merely 
smiled sheepishly. I saw myself in front of an 

24 



open page of Bergson, its black lines dancing before 
my eyes, while Cyril was laughing outside. The 
idea horrified me. I crawled over to Anne and 
called her in a low voice. She opened her eyes. I 
bent an anxious, pleading face over her, drawing in 
my cheeks to make myself look like an overworked 
intellectual. 

“Anne,” I said, ‘^you’re not going to do that to 
me, make me work in this heat . . . these holidays 
could do me so ?.iuch good.” 

She stared at me /or a moment, then smiled 
mysteriously and turned her head away. 

“I shall have to make you do ‘that,’ even in this 
heat, as you say. You’ll be angry with me for a 
day or two, as I know y®u, but you’ll pass your 
exam.” 

“There are things one cannot be made to do,” I 
said grimly. 

Her only response was a supercilious look, and 
I returned to my place full of foreboding. Elsa 
was chattering about various festivities along the 
Riviera, but my father was not listening. Fronj his 
place at the apex of the triangle formed by their 
bodies, he was gazing at Anne’s upturned profile 
with a resolute stare that I recognised. His hand 
opened and closed on the sand with a gentle, regular, 
persistent movement. I ran u^wn to the sea and 
plunged in, bemoaning the holiday we might have 

25 



had. All the elements of a drama were to hand: 
a seducer, a demi-mondaine and a determined 
woman. I saw an exquisite red and blue shell on 
the sea-bed. I dived for it, and held it, smooth 
and emp^y, in my hand all the morning. I dedded 
it was a lucky charm, and that I would keep it. I 
am surprised that I have not lost it, for I lose every- 
thing. To-day it is still pink and warm as it lies 
in my palm, and makes me feel like crying. 


26 



4 


yynne was extraordinarily kind to Elsa during 
/-A the following^days. In spite of the numer- 
JL JL ous silly remarks that punctuated Elisa’s con- 
versation, she never gave vent to any of those 
cutting phrases which were her speciality, and which 
would have covered ^he poor girl with ridicule. I 
was most surprised, and began to admire Anne’s 
forbearance and generosity without realising how 
subtle she wasj for my father, who would soon have 
tired of such cruel tactics, *Vvas now filled with grati- 
tude towards her. He used his appreciation as a 
pretext for drawing her, so to speak, into the family 
circle j by implying all the time that I was partly her 
responsibility, and altogether behaving towards her 
as if she were a second mother to me. But I noticed 
that his every look and gesture betrayed a secret 
desire for her. Whenever 1 caught a similar gleam 
in Cyril’s eye, it left me undecided whether to egg 
him on or to run away. On that point I must have 
been more easily influenced than Anne, for her 
attitude to my father expressed such indifference 
and calm friendliness that 1 >vas reassured. I be- 
gan to believe that I had been mistaken the first 



day. 1 did not notice that this unconcern of hers 
was just what provoked my father. And then there 
were her silences, apparently so artless and full of 
fine feeling, and such a contrast to Elsa’s incessant 
chatter, ^hat it was like light and shade. Poor 
Elsa! She had really no suspicions whatsoever, and 
although still suffering from the effects of the sun, 
remained her usual talkative and exuberant self. 

A day came, however, when she must have inter- 
cepted a look of my father’ and drawn her own 
conclusions from it. Before .lunch I saw her whis- 
pering into his ear. For a moment he seemed 
rather put out, but then he nodded and smiled. 
After coffee Elsa walked over to the door, turned 
round, and striking a lan^orous, film-star pose, said 
in an affected voice : 

“Are you coming, Ra 3 rmond?” 

My father got up and followed her, muttering 
something about the benefits of the siesta. Anne had 
not moved, hei cigaiette was smouldering between 
her fingers. I felt I ought to say something : 

“People say that a siesta is restful, but I think 
it is the opposite ...” 

I stopped short, conscious that my words were 
equivocal. 

“That’s enough,” said Anne dryly. 

There was nothing equivocal about her tone. 
She had of course found my remark in bad taste, 

28 



but when I looked at her I saw that her face was 
deliberately calm and composed. It made me feel 
that perhaps at that moment she was passionately 
jealous of Elsa. While I was wondering how I 
could console her, a cynical idea occurred to me. 
Cynicism always enchanted me by producing a 
delicious feeling of self-assmance and of being in 
league with myself. I could not keep it back: 

“ 1 imagine that with Elsa’s sunburn that kind of 
siesta can’t be v-'ry exciting for either of them.” 

I ^^ould have done t)etter to say nothing. 

“I detest that kind ol remark. At your age it’s 
not ojily stupid, but deplorable.” 

I suddenly felt angry: 

“I only said it as a jokt?, you know. I’m sure 
they are really quite happy.” 

She turned to me with an outraged expression, 
and I at once apologised. She closed her eyes and 
began to speak in a low, patient voice : 

“Your idea of love is rather primitive. It is not 
a series of sensations, independent of each other. ...” 

I realised how every time i had fallen in love it 
had been like that: a sudden emotion, roused by a 
face, a gesture or a kiss, which I remembered only 
as incoherent moments of excitement. “It is 
something different,” said Anne, “xliere are such 
things as lasting affection, swe ..;iess, a sense of loss 
. . . but I suppose you wouldn’t understand.” 


29 



She made an evasive gesture and took up a news- 
paper. If only she had been angry instead of show- 
ing that resigned' indifference to my emotional 
irresponsibility! ‘ All the same I felt she was right: 
that I w^ governed by my instincts like an animal, 
swayed this way and that by other people, that I was 
shallow and weak. I despised myself, and it was a 
horribly painful sensation, all the more since I was 
not used to self-criticism. I went up to my room in 
a daze. Lying in bed on pay lukewarm sheet I 
thought of Anne’s words. “It is something differ- 
ent, it’s a sense of loss.” Had I ever missed any- 
one? 

The next fortnight is rather vague in my memory 
because I deliberately shut my eyes to any threat to 
our security, but the rest of the holiday stands out 
all the more clearly because of the rdle I chose to 
play in it. 

To go back to those first three weeks, three happy 
weeks after all: when exactly did my father begin 
to treat Anne with a new familiarity? Was it the 
day he reproached her for her indifference, while 
pretending to laugh at it? Or the time he grimly 
compared her subtlety with Elsa’s semi-imbecility? 
My peace of mind was based on the stupid idea that 
they had known each other for fifteen years, and 
that if they had been going to fall in love, they would 
have done so earlier. And I thought also that if 

50 



it had to happen, the affair would last at the most 
three months, and Anne wotdd be left with her 
memories and perhaps a slight feeling of humilia- 
tion. Yet all the time I knew in my heart that Anne 
was not a woman who could be lightly abandoned. 

But Cyril was there, and I was fully occupied. In 
the evenings we often drove to Saint-Tropez and 
danced in various bars to the soft music of a clari- 
net. At those moments we felt we were madly 
in love, but by the nert morning it was all forgotten. 
During the day we went sailing. My father some- 
times came with us. He thought a lot of Cyril, 
especially since he had been allowed to beat him in 
a swimming race. He called Cyril ‘my boy’, 
Cyril called him ‘sir’, bift I sometimes wondered 
which of the two was the adult. 

One afternoon we went to tea with Cyril’s mother, 
a quiet smiling old lady who spoke to us of her diffi- 
culties as a widow and mother. My father sympa- 
thised with her, looked gratefully at Anne, and paid 
innumerable compliments. I must say he never 
minded wasting his time! \nne looked on at the 
spectacle with an amiable smile, and afterweirds 
said she thought her charming. I broke into 
imprecations against old ladies of that sort. They 
both seemed amused, which made me furious. 

“Don’t you realise how self-righteous she is?” 
I insisted. “That she pats herself on the back 

51 



because she feels she has done her duty by leading 
a respectable bourgeois life?’^ 

‘‘But it is true,” said Anne. “She has done her 
duty as a wife and mother, as they say.” 

“You don’t understand at all,” I said. “She 
brought up her child ^ most likely she was faithful 
to her husband, and so had no worries 5 she has led 
the life of millions of other women, and she’s proud 
of it. She glorifies herself for a negative reason, 
and not for having accomplished anything.” 

“Your ideas are fashionable, but you don’t know 
what you are talking about,” Anne said. 

She was probably right: I believed what I said 
at the time, but I must admit that I was only repeat- 
ing what I had heard. *iNevertheless ray life and 
my father’s upheld that theory, and Anne hurt my 
feelings by despising it. One can be just as 
attached to futilities as to anything ehe. I suddenly 
felt an urgent desire to undeceive her. I did not 
think the 0])portunity would occur so soon, nor that 
I would be able to seize it. Anyhow it was quite 
likely that in a month’s time I might have entirely 
different opinions on any given subject. What 
more could have been expected of me ? 


32 



5 


yt nd then one day things came to a head. In 
yLA the morning my father announced that he 
JL would like to go to Cannes that evening to 
dance at the casino, and perhaps gamble as well. I 
remember how pleased Elsa was. In the familiar 
casino atmosphere she hoped to resume her r61e of 
a ‘femme fatale’, slightly obscured of late by her 
sunburn and our semi-isolation. Contrary to my 
expectation Anne did not oppose our plans; she even 
seemed quite pleased. As?*soon as dinner was over 
I went up to my room to put on an evening frock, 
the only one I possessed, by the way. It had been 
chosen by my father, and was made of an exotic 
mateiial, probably too exotic for a girl of my age, 
but niy father, either from inclination or habit, 
liked to give me a veneer of sophistication. I found 
him downstairs, spaikling in a new dinner jacket, 
and I put my arms round his neck : 

“You’re the best-looking man I know! ” 

“Except Cyril,” he answered without conviction. 
“ And as for you, you’re the prettiest girl I know.” 

“After Elsa and Anne,” I replied without believ- 
ing it myself. 


55 



“Since they’re not down yet, and have the cheek 
to keep us waiting, come and dance with your 
rheumaticky old father ! ” 

Once again I felt the thrill that always preceded 
our evenings out together. He really had nothing 
of an old father about him! While dancing I in- 
haled the warmth of his famjliar perfume, eau de 
cologne and tobacco. He danced slowly with half- 
closed eyes, a happy, irrepressible little smile, like 
my own, on his lips. . 

“ You must teach me the Ijebop,*’ he said, forget- 
ting his talk of rheumatism. 

He stopped dancing to welcome Elsa with polite 
flattery. She came slowly down the stairs in her 
green dress, a conventi<3nal smile on her face, her 
casino smile. She had made the most of her life- 
less hair and scorched skin, but the result weis more 
meretricious than brilliant. Fortunately she 
seemed unaware of it. 

“Are we going?” 

“Anne’s not here yet,” I remarked. 

“Go up and see if she’s ready,” said my father. 
“It will be midnight before we get to Cannes.” 

I ran up the stairs, getting somewhat entangled 
with my skirt, and knocked at Anne’s door. She 
called to me to come in, but I stopped on the 
threshold. She was wearing a grey dress, a peculiar 
grey, almost white, which, when it caught the light, 

34 



resembled the colour of the sea at dawn. She 
seemed to me the personification of mature charm. 

“Oh Anne, what a magnificent dress!” I said. 

She smiled into the mirror as one smiles at a per- 
son one is about to leave. 

“This grey is a success,” she said. 

“You are a success!” I answered. 

She pinched my ear, her eyes were dark blue, and 
I saw them light up with a smile. 

“You’re a dear child, even though you can be 
tiresome at times.” 

She went out in front of me without a glance at 
my dress. In a way I was relieved, but all the same 
it was mortifjring. I followed her down the stairs 
and I saw my father corhing to meet her. He 
stopped at the bottom, his foot on the first step, his 
face raised. Elsa was looking on. I remember the 
scene perfectly. First of all, in front of me, Anne’s 
golden neck and perfect shoulders, a little lower 
down my father’s fascinated face and extended hand, 
and, already in the distance, Elsa’s silhouette. 

“Anne, you are wonderful! ” said my father. 

She smiled as she passed him and took her coat. 

“ Shall we meet there ? ” she asked. “ Cdcile, will 
you come with me?” 

She let me drive. At night the road appeared so 
beautiful that I went slowly. Anne was silent; she 
did not even seem to notice the blaring wireless. 

55 



When my father’s car passed us at a bend she re- 
mained unmoved. I felt I was out of the race, 
watching a performance in which I could no longer 
intervene. 

At the casino my father saw to it that we soon lost 
sight of each other. I found myself at the bar with 
Elsa and one of her acquaintances, a half-tipsy 
South American. He was connected with the stage 
and had such a passionate love for it that even in his 
inebriated condition he could remain amusing. I 
spent an agreeable hour with him, but Elsa was 
bored. She knew one or two big names, bi;t that 
was not her world. All of a sudden she asked me 
where my father wat, as if I had some means of 
knowing. She then left us. The South American 
seemed put out for a moment, but another whisky 
set him up again. My mind was a blank. I was 
quite light-headed, for I had been drinking with 
him out of politeness. It became grotesque when 
he wanted to dance. 1 was forced to hold him up 
and to extricate my feet from under his, which 
required a lot of energy. We laughed so much 
that when Elsa tapped me on the shoulder and I saw 
her Cassandra-like expression, I almost felt like 
telling her to go to the devil. 

“ I can’t find them,” she said. 

She looked utterly distraught. Her powder had 
worn oft leaving her skin shiny, her features were 

56 



drawn; she was a pitiable sight. I suddenly felt 
very angry with my father; he was being most 
unkind. 

“Ah, I know where they are,^^ I said, smiling as 
if I referred to something quite ordinary about 
which she need have no anxiety. “I’ll soon be 
back.” 

Deprived of my support, the South American fell 
into Elsa’s arms and seemed comfortable enough 
there. I reflect'^d somewhat sadly that she wa^ 
more experienced than I, and that I could not very 
well bear her a grudge. 

The casino was big, and I went all round it twice 
without any success. I scanned the terrace and at 
last thought of the car. li took me some time to 
find it in the car park. They were inside. I 
approached from behind and saw them through the 
rear window. Their profiles were very close 
together and very serious, and looked strangely 
beautiful in the lamplight. They were facing each 
other and must have been talking in low tones, for 
I saw their lips move. I would have liked to go 
away again, but the thought of Elsa made me open 
the door. My father had his hand on Anne’s arm, 
and they scarcely noticed me. 

“Are you having a good time?” I asked politely. 

“What is the matter?” said my father irritably. 
“What are you doing here?” 


57 



“And you? Ulsa has been searching for you 
everywhere for the past hour.” 

Anne turned her head slowly and reluctantly 
towards me. 

“We’re going home. Tell her I was t.red and 
your father drove me back. When you’ve had 
enough take my car.” 

I was trembling with indignation and could hardly 
speak : 

“Had enough? But ycu don’t realise what 
}ou’re saying, it’s disgusting! ” 

“What is disgusting?” asked my father with 
astonishment. 

“You take a red-haired girl to the seaside, expose 
her to the hot sun whioh she can’t stand, and when 
her skin has all peeled you abandon her. It’s 
altogether too simple ! What on earth shall I say to 
Elsa?” 

Anne turned to him with an air of weariness. He 
smiled at her, obviously not listening. My exas- 
peration knew no bounds: 

“ I shall tell Elsa that my father has found some- 
one else to sleep with, and that she had better come 
back some other time. Is that right ? ” 

My father’s exclamation and Anne’s slap were 
simultaneous. I hurriedly withdrew my head 
from the car-door. She had hurt me. 

“Apologise at once! ” said my father. 


38 



I stood motionless, with my thoughts in a whirl. 
Noble attitudes always occur to me too late. 

“ Come here,” said Anne. 

She did not sound menacing, and I went closer. 
She put her hand against my cheek and spoke 
slowly and gently as if I were rather simple : 

“ Don’t be naughf^. I’m very sorry for Elsa, but 
you are tactful enough to arrange everything for the 
best. Tomorrow we’ll discuss it all. Did I hurt 
you very much'*” 

“Not at all,” I said politely. Her sudden 
gentleness after my intemperate rage made me 
want to burst into tears. I watched them drive 
away, feeling completely deflated. My only conso- 
lation was the thought of my tactfulness. 

I walked slowly back to the casino, where I foimd 
Elsa with the South American clinging to her arm. 

“Anne wasn’t well,” I said in an off-hand 
manner. “Papa had to take her home. What 
about a drink?” 

She looked at me without answering. I tried to 
find a more convincing explanation : 

“ She was awfully sick,” I said. “ It was ghastly, 
her dress is mined.” This detail seemed to me to 
make my story more plausible, but Elsa began to 
weep quietly and sadly. I did not know what to 
do. 

“Oh, Cdcile, we were so happy!” she said, and 

B.T. — 4 39 



her sobs redoubled in intensity. The South Ameri- 
can began to cry, repeating “We were so happy, 
so happy!” At that moment I heartily detested 
Anne and my father. I would have done anything 
to stop Elsa from crying, Her eye-black from running, 
and the j>outh American from howling. 

“Nothing is settled yet, Elsa. Come home with 
me now!” 

“No! I’ll fetch my suitcases later,” she sobbed. 
“Goodbye, Cdcile, we got oji well together, didn’t 
we?” 

We had never talked of an3rthing but clothes or 
the weather, but still it seemed to me that I was 
losing an old friend. I quickly turned away and 
ran to the car. 


40 



6 


T he following morning was wretched, probably 
because of the^whisky I had drunk the night 
before. I awoke to find myself lying across 
my bed in the dark 5 my tongue heavy, my limbs 
unbearably dan.p and sticky. A single ray of sun- 
shine filtered through the slats ol the shutters and I 
could see a million motes dancing in it. I felt no 
desire to get up, nor to stay in bed. I wondered 
how Anne and my father would look if Elsa were 
to turn up that morning. < forced myself to think 
of them in order to be able to get out of bed without 
effort. At last I managed to stand up on the cool 
stone floor. I was giddy and aching. The mirror 
reflected a sad “ightj I leant against it and peered 
at those dilated eyes and dry lips, an unknown face ; 
mine? If I was weak azid cowardly, could it be 
because of those lips, the particular shape of my 
body, these odious, arbitrary limits ? And if I were 
limited, why had I only now become aware of it ? 
I amused myself by detesting my reflection, hating 
that wolf-like face, hollow and worn by debauch. 
I repeated the word ‘ debauch ’ dumbly, looking into 
“ly eyes in the mirror, and suddenly I saw myself 

41 



smile. What a debauch! A few unfortunate 
drinks, a slap in the face and some tears! I 
brushed my teeth and went downstairs. 

My father and Anne were already on the terrace 
sitting beside each other in front of their breakfast 
tray. I sat down opposite them, muttering a vague 
‘good morning’. A feeling ^of shyness made me 
keep my eyes lowered, but after a time, as they 
remained silent 1 was forced to look at them. Anne 
appeared tired, the only sign of a night of love. 
They were both smiling hjjppily, and I was very 
much impressed, for happiness has always seemed to 
me a great achievement. 

“Did you sleep well?” asked my father. 

“Not too badly,” I teplied. “I drank a lot of 
whisky last night.” 

I poured out a cup of coffee, but after the first 
sip I quickly put it down. Their silence had a wait- 
ing quality that made me feel uneasy. I was too 
tired to bear it for long. 

“What’s the matter? You look so mysterious.” 

My father lit a cigarette, making an obvious 
effort to seem unconcerned, and for once in her life 
Anne seemed embarrassed. 

‘ ‘ 1 would like to ask you something, ’ ’ she said at last. 

“I suppose you want me to take another message 
to Elsa ?” I said, imagining the worst. 

She turned towards my father: 


42 



“Your father and I want to get married,” she 
said. 

I stared first at her, then at my father. I half 
expected some sign from him, perhaps a wink, 
which, though I might have found it shocking, 
would have reassured me, but he was looking down 
at his hands. I said^to myself ‘ it can’t be possible ! ’, 
but I already knew it was true. 

“What a good idea,” I said to gain time. 

I could not understand how my father, who had 
always set himself so obstinately against marriage 
and its chains, could have decided on it in a single 
night. We were about to lose our independence. 
I could visualise our future family life, a life which 
would suddenly be given equilibrium by Anne’s 
intelligence and refinement 5 the life I had envied 
her. We would have clever tactful friends, and 
quiet pleasant evenings. . . . I found myself despis- 
ing noisy dinners. South Americans and girls like 
Elsa. I felt proud and superior. 

“It’s a very, very good idea,” I repeated, and I 
smiled at them. 

“I knew you’d be pleased, my pet,” said my 
father. 

He was relaxed and delighted. Anne’s face, 
subtly changed by love, seemed gentler, making her 
appear more accessible than she had ever been 
before. 


43 



“G>me here, my pet,” said my father} and hold- 
ing out his hands, he drew me close to them both. 
I was half-kneeling in front of them, while they 
stroked my hair and looked at me with tender 
emotion. But I could not stop thinking that 
although my life was perhaps at that very moment 
changing its whole course, I vyas in reality nothing 
more than a kitten to them, an affectionate little 
animal. I felt them above me, united by a past 
and a future, by ties that I djd not know and which 
could not hold me. But I deliberately closed my 
eyes and went on playing my part, laying my head 
on their knees and laughing. For was I not happy ? 
Anne was all right, I had no serious fault to find 
with her. She would ‘guide me, relieve me of 
responsibility, and be at hand whenever I might 
need her. She would make both my father and me 
into paragons of virtue. 

My father got up to fetch a bottle of champagne. 
I felt sickened. He was happy, which was the chief 
thing, but I had so often seen him happy on account 
of a woman. 

“I was rather frightened of you,” said Anne. 

“Why?” I asked. Her w'ords had given me the 
impression that a veto from me could have prevented 
their marriage. 

“I was afraid of your being frightened of me,” 
she said laughing. 

44 



I began to laugh too, because actually 1 was a 
little scared of her. She wanted me to understand 
that she knew it, and that it was unnecessary. 

“Does the marriage of two old people like oiu'- 
selves seem ridiculous to you?” 

“You’re not old,” I said emphatically, as my 
father came dancing j^ack with a bottle in his hand. 

He sat down next to Anne and put his arm round 
her shoulders. She moved nearer to him and I 
looked away in <‘mbarrassment. She was no dou’nt 
marrying him for just that; for his laughter, for the 
firm reassurance of his arm, for his vitality, his 
warmth. At forty there could be the fear of soli- 
tude, or perhaps a last upsurge of the senses. ... I 
had never thought of Anne* as a woman, but as an 
entity. I had seen her as a self-assured, elegant, 
and clever person, but never weak or sensual. I 
quite understood that my father felt proud, the 
self-satisfied, indifferent Anne Larsen was going to 
marry liim. Did he love her, and if so, Weis he 
capable of loving her for long? Was there any 
difference between this new feeling and the affec- 
tion he had shown Elsa ? The sun was making my 
head spin, and I shut my eyes. We were all three 
on the terrace, full of reserves, of secret fears, and 
of happiness. 

Elsa did not come back just then. A week flew 
by, seven happy, agreeable days, the only ones. 

45 



We made elaborate plans for furnishing our home, 
and discussed time-tables which my father and I took 
pleasme in cutting as fine as possible with the blind 
obstinacy of those who have never had any use for 
them. Did we ever believe in them for one 
moment? Did my father really think it possible 
to have lunch every day at tl^e same place at 12.30 
sharp, to have dinner at home, and not to go out 
afterwards? However, he gaily prepared to inter 
Bohemianism, and began to preach order, and to 
extol the joys of an elegaijt, oiganised bourgeois 
existence. No doubt for him, as well as for myself, 
all these plans were merely castles in the air. 

How well I remember that week! Anne was 
relaxed, confident, and % ery sweet ; my father loved 
her. I saw them coming down in the mornings, 
leaning on each other, laughing gaily, with shad- 
ows under their eyes, and I swear that I should have 
liked nothing better than that their happiness should 
last all their lives. In the evening we often drank 
our apdntif sitting on some cafd terrace by the sea. 
Everywhere we went we were taken for a happy, 
normal family, and I, who was used to going out 
alone with my father and seeing the knowing smiles, 
and malicious or pitying glances, was delighted to 
play a r61e more suitable to my age. They were to 
be married on our return to Paris. 

Poor Cyril had witnessed the transformation in 


46 



our midst with a certain amazement, but he was 
comforted by the thought that this time it would 
be legalised. We went out sailing together and 
kissed when we felt inclined, but sometimes diiring 
our embraces I thought of Anne’s face as I saw it 
in the mornings, with its softened contours. I re- 
called the happy i^nchalance, the languid grace 
that love imparted to her movements, and I en- 
vied her. One can grow tired of kissing, and no 
doubt if Cyril had not been so fond of me I would 
have become his mistress that week. 

At six o’clock, on our return from the islands, 
Cyril would pull the boat onto the sand. We would 
go up to the house through the pine wood in single 
file, pretending we were Indians, or run handicap 
races to warm ourselves up. He always caught me 
before we reached the house and would spring on 
me with a shout of victory, rolling me on the pine 
needles, pinning my arms down and kissing me. I 
can still remember those light, breathless kisses, 
and Cyril’s heart beating against mine in rhythm 
with the soft thud of the waves on the sand. Four 
heart-beats and four waves, and then gradually he 
would regain his breath and his kisses would become 
more urgent, the sound of the sea would grow dim 
and give way to the pulse in my ears. 

One evening we were surprised by Anne’s voice. 
Cyril was lying close to me in the red glow of the 

47 



sunset. I can understand that Anne might have 
been misled by the sight of us there in our scanty 
bathing things. She called me sharply. 

Cyril bounded to his feet, naturally somewhat 
ashamed. Keeping my eyes on Anne, I slowly got 
up in my turn. She faceu Cyril, and looking right 
through him spoke in a quiet yoice: “I don’t wish 
to see you again.” 

He made no reply, but bent over and kissed my 
shoulder before departing J felt surprised and 
touched, as if his gestuie had been a sort of pledge. 
Anne was staring at m^ with the same grave and 
detached look, as though she were thinking of 
something else. Her manner infuriated me If 
she was so deep in thought, why speak at alP I 
went up to her, feigning embarrassment for the sake 
of politeness. At last she seemed to notice me and 
mechanically iemo\ed a pine needle from iriy neck. 
I saw her face assume its beautiful mask of disdain, 
that expression of weariness and disapproval which 
became her so well, and which always frightened 
me a little. 

“You should know that such diversions usually 
end up in a nursing home.” 

She stood there looking straight at me as she 
spoke, and I was horribly ashamed. She was one 
of those women who can stand perfectly still while 
they talk 5 1 always needed the support of a chair, or 

48 



some object to hold like a cigarette, or the distraction 
of swinging one leg over the other and watching it 
move. 

‘‘You mustn’t exaggerate,” I said with a smile. 
“I was only kissing Cyril, and that won’t lead me to 
any nursing home.” 

“Please don’t see Jiim again,” she said, as if she 
did not believe mo. “Do not protest: you are 
seventeen and I feel a certain responsibility for you 
now. I’m not going ♦c let you ruin your life. In 
any case you have work to do, and that will occupy 
your afternoons.” 

She turned her back on me and walked towards 
the house in her nonchalant way. A paralysing 
sense of calamity kept me t-ooted to the spot. She 
had meant every word, what was the use of argu- 
ments or denials when she would receive them with 
the sort of indifference that was worse than con- 
tempt, as if I did not even exist, as if I were some- 
thing to be squashed underfoot, and not myself, 
CMciJe, whom she had always known. My only 
hope now was my father 5 surely he would say as 
usuvd: ‘Well now, who’s tlie boy? I suppose he’s 
a handsome fellow, but beware, my girl!’ If he 
did not react like this, my holidays would be ruined. 

Dinner was a nightmare. Not for one moment 
had Anne suggested that she would not tell my 
father anything if I promised to work 5 it was not in 

49 



her nature to bargain. I was pleased in one way, 
but also disappointed that she had deprived me of a 
chance to despise her. As usual she avoided a false 
move, and it was only when we had finished our 
soup that she seemed to remember the incident. 

“I do wish you’d give jour daughter some advice, 
Raymond. I found her in thf wood with Cyril this 
evening, and they seemed to be going rather far.” 

My father, poor man, tried to pass the whole thing 
off as a joke. 

“ What’s that you say ? What were they up to ? ” 

“I was kissing him,” I said. “And Anne 
thought ...” 

“I never thought anything at all,” she inter- 
rupted. “But it might be a good idea for her to 
stop seeing him for a time and to work at her 
philosophy instead.” 

“Poor little thing!” said my father. “After all 
Cyril’s a nice boy, isn't he ?” 

“And C^ile is a nice girl,” said Anne. “That’s 
why I should be heartbroken if anything should 
happen to her, and it seems to me inevitable that it 
will, if you consider what complete freedom she 
enjoys here, and that they are constantly together 
and have nothing whatever to do. Don’t you 

5 > 

At her last words I looked up and saw that my 
father was very perturbed. 

60 




“You are probably right,” he said. “After all, 
you ought to do some work, Cdcile. You surely 
don’t want to fail in philosophy and have to take it 
again ? ” 

“What do you think I care?” I answered. 

He glanced at me and then tinned away. I was 
bewildered. 1 realified that procrastination can rule 
our lives, yet not provide us with any arguments in 
its defence. 

“Listen,” said Ann*', taking my hand across the 
table. “Won’t you exchange your r61e of a wood 
nymph for that of a good schoolgirl for one month ? 
Would it be so serious?” 

They both looked at me expectantly} seen in that 
light, the argument was sftnple enough. I gently 
withdrew my hand. 

“Yes, very serious,” I said, so softly that they did 
not hear it, or did not want to. 

The following morning I came across a phrase 
from Bergson: 

“Whatever irrelevance one may at first find 
between the cause and the effects, and although a 
rule of guidance towards an assertion concerning 
the root of things may be far distant, it is always 
in a contact with the generative force of life that 
one is able to extract the power to love humanity.” 

I repeated the phrase, quietly at first, so as not to get 

51 



agitated, then in a louder voice. I held my head in 
my hands and looked at the book with great atten- 
tion. At last I understood it, but I felt as cold and 
impotent as when I liad read it the firstnime. I 
could not continue. With the best will in the world 
I applied myself to the next lines, and suddenly 
something arose in me like a^storm and threw me 
onto the bed. I thought of Cyril waiting for me 
down in the creek, of the swaying boai^, of the 
pleasure of our kisses, and then I tliought of Anne, 
but in a way that made me sit up on my bed with a 
fast-beating heart, telling mysell that I w^as stupid, 
monstrous, nothing hut a lazy, spoilt child, and had 
no right to have such thoughts. But all the same, in 
spite of myself I continfued to reflect that she was 
dangerous, and that I must get rid of her. I 
thought of the lunch T had endured with clenched 
teeth, tortured by a feeling of resentment for which 
I despised and ridiculed myself. Yes, it was for this 
I reproached Anne: she prevented me from liking 
my‘?elf. I, who wis «o naturally meant for happi- 
ness and gaiety, had been forced by her into a world 
of self-critici‘'ni and guilty conscience, where, un- 
accu^itonied to introspection, I was completely lost. 
And what did she bring me? I took stock: She 
wanted my father 5 '-he had got him. She would 
gradually make of us the husband and step-daughter 
of Anne Larsen; that is to say, «he would turn us into 

52 



two civilised, well-behaved and happy people. For 
she would certainly make us happy. How easily, 
unstable and irresponsible as we were, we would 
yield to h^r influence, and be drawn into the attrac- 
tive framework of her orderly plan of living. She 
was much too efficient: already my fatVier was 
estranged from me. •! was obsessed by his embar- 
rassed face turning away from me at table. Tears 
came into my eyes at the thought of the jokes we 
used to have together, our gay laughter as we drove 
home at dd*vn through the empty streets of Pans. 
All that was over. In my turn I would be in- 
fluenced, re-orientated, re-inodelled by Anne. I 
would not even mind it, she would act with intelli- 
gence, irony and sweetness/ and I would be incap- 
able of resistance 5 in six months I should no longer 
even wish to resist. 

At all costs I must take steps to regain my father 
and our former life. How infinitely desirable those 
two years suddenly appealed to me, those happy 
years I was so willing to renounce the other day . . . 
the liberty to think, even to think wrongly or not at 
all, the freedom to choose my own life, to choose 
myself. I cannot say ‘to be myself’, for I was only 
soft clay, but still I could refuse to be moulded. 

I realise that one might find complicated motives 
for this change in me, one might endow me with 
spectaculeir complexes: such as an incestuous love 

53 



for my father, or a morbid passion for Anne, but I 
know the true reasons were the heat, Bergson, and 
Cyril, or at least his absence. I dwelt on this all the 
afternoon in a most unpleasant mood, induced by 
the discovery that we were entirely at Anne’s 
mercy. I was not used lO reflection, and it made me 
irritable. At dinner, as in the morning, 1 did not 
open my mouth. My father thought it appropriate 
to chaff me ; 

“What I like about youth is its spontaneity, its 
gay conversation.” 

I was trembling with rage. It was true that he 
loved youth ; and with whom could I have talked if 
not with him? We had discussed everjrthing to- 
gether: love, death, music. Now he himself had 
disarmed and abandoned me. Looking at him I 
thought: ‘You don’t love me any more, you have 
betrayed me!’ I tried to make him understand 
without words how desperate I was. He seemed 
suddenly alarmed} perhaps he understood that the 
time for joking was past, and that our relationship 
was in danger. I saw liim stiffen, and it appeared 
as though he were about to ask a question. Anne 
turned to me : 

“You don’t look well. I feel sorry now for 
making you work.” 

I did not reply. I felt too disgusted that I had 
got myself into a state which I could no longer 

44 



control. We had finished dinner. On the terrace, 
in the rectangle of light projected from the dining- 
room window, I saw Anne’s long nervous hand 
reach out 'to find my father’s. I thought of Cyril. 
I would have liked him to take me in his arms on 
that moonlit terrace, alive with crickets. I would 
have liked to be caressed, consoled, reconciled with 
myself. My father and Anno were silent, they had 
a night of love to look forward to j I had Bergson. I 
tried to cry, to feel sony for myself, but in vain; it 
was already Anne for w horn I was sorry, as if I were 
certain of victory. 


B.T. — 5 


55 




Part Two 




1 


I am surprised how clearly I remember every- 
tliing from that moment. I acquired an added 
awareness of other people and of myself. Until 
then I had always been spontaneous and light- 
hearted, but the last lew days had upset me to the 
extent of forcing me to reflect and to look at myself 
with a critical eye. However, I seemed to come no 
nearer to a solution of my problems. I kept telling 
myself that my feelings about Anne were mean and 
stupid, and that my desire to separate her from my 
father w as vicious. Then I would argue that after 
all I had every right to feel as I did. For the first 
time in my life I w^as divided against myself. Up in 
my room I reasoned with myself for hours on end in 
an attempt to discover whether the fear and hostility 
which Anne inspired in me w^ere justified, or if I 
was merely a silly, spoilt, selfish girl in a mood of 
sham independence. 

In the meantime I grew thinner every day. On 
the beach I did nothing but sleep, and at meal-times 
I maintained a strained silence that ended by making 
the others feel uneasy. And all the time I watched 
Anne. At dinner I would say to myself, ‘ Doesn’t 

59 



eveiy movement she makes prove how much she 
lo\ cs him ? Could anyone be more in love ? How 
can I be angry witli her when she smiles at me with 
that trace of anxiety in her eyes?’ BuV suddenly 
she would say, When we get home, Raymond . . . ” 
and the thought that she was going to share our life 
and interfere with us w^ould rouse me again. Once 
more she seemed calculating and cold. I thought: 
‘She is cold, we are warm-hearted, she is possessive, 
we are independent. She' is indifferent; other 
people don’t interest her, we love them. She is 
resei\ed, we are gay. We are full of life and she 
will slink in between us with her sobriety; she will 
w^arm herself at our fire and gradually rob us of our 
enthusiasm; like a beautiful serpent she will rob us 
of ever} thing.’ I repeated ‘a beautiful serpent’ 
. . . slie passed me the bread, and suddenly I came 
to my senses. ‘But it’s crazy,’ I thought. ‘That’s 
Anne, your friend w ho was so kind to you, who is so 
clever. Her aloofness is a mere outward form, 
there’s nothing calculated about it, her indifference 
shields her from the countless sordid things in life, 
it’s a sign of nobility.’ A beautiful serpent ... I 
felt myself turn pale with shame. I looked at her, 
silently imploring her forgiveness. At times she 
noticed my expression and a shadow of surprise and 
uncertainty clouded her face and made her break 
ofi in the middle of a sentence. Her eyes turned 

60 



instinctively to my father; but his glance held noth- 
ing but admiration or desire, he did not understand 
tlie cause of her disquiet. Little by little I made the 
atmosphere unbearable, and I detested myself for it. 

My father suffered as much as his nature per- 
mitted, that is to say hardly at all, for he was mad 
about Anne, madly ^proud and happy, and nothing 
else existed for him. However, one day when I was 
dozing on the beach after my morning bathe, he sat 
do\Mi next to me and looked at me closely. I felt 
his eyes upon me, and with the air of false gaiety 
that was fast becoming a habit I was just going to 
ask him to come in for a swim when he put his 
hand on my head and called to Anne in a doleful 
voice : 

“Come over here and have a look at this creature; 
she's as thin as a rake. If this is the effect work has 
on her, she’ll have to give it up! ” 

He thought that would settle everything, and 
no doubt it w^ould have done so ten days earlier. 
But now I ^vas too deeply immersed in complications, 
and the hours set aside for work in the afternoons no 
longer bothered me, especially as I had not opened a 
book since Bergson. 

Anne came up to us. I remained lying face down 
on the sand listening to the muffled sound of her 
footsteps. She sat on my other side. 

“ It certainly doesn’t seem to agree with her,” she 

61 



said. “But if she really did some work instead of 
walking up and down in her room ...” 

I had turned round and was looking at them. 
How did she know that I was not working? Per- 
haps she^had even read my thoughts? I believed 
her to be capable of anything. 

I protested: * 

“I don’t walk up and down in my room! ” 

“Do you miss that boy?” asked my father. 
“No!” 

This was not quite true, but I certainly had had 
no time to think of Cyril. 

“But still, you’re not well,” said my father 
firmly. “Anne, do you notice it too? She looks 
like a chicken that has Been drawn and then put to 
roast in the sun.” 

“Make an effort, Cdcile dear,” said Anne. “Do 
a little work and try to eat a lot. That exam is 
important. ...” 

“I don’t care a hang about the exam!” I cried. 
“Can’t you undeistand? I just don’t care!” 

I looked straight at her, despairingly, so that she 
should realise that something more serious than my 
examination was at stake. I longed for her to ask 
me. “Well, what is it?” and ply me with questions, 
and force me to tell her everything : then I would be 
won over and she could do anything she liked with 
me, and I should no longer be in torment. She 

62 



looked at me attentively. I could see the Prussian 
blue of her eyes darken with concentration and re- 
proach. Then I understood that it would never 
occur to her to question me and so deliver me from 
myself, because even if the thought had entered her 
head, her code of behaviour would have precluded 
it. And I saw too that she had no idea of the tumult 
within me, or even if she had, her attitude would 
have been one of indifference and disdain, which was 
in any case what I deserved! Anne always gave 
everything its exact vaiue, that is why I could never 
come to an understanding with her. 

1 dropped back onto the sand and laid my cheek 
against its soft warmth. I sighed deeply and began 
to tremble. I could feel Anne’s hand, tranquil and 
steady, on the back of my neck, holding me still for 
a moment, just long enough to stop my nervous 
tremor. 

“Don’t complicate life for yourself,” she said. 
“You’ve always been so contented and lively, and 
had no head for an)'tlung serious. It doesn’t suit 
you to be pensive and sad.” 

“I know that,” I answered. “I’m just a 
thoughtless healthy young thing, brimful of gaiety 
and stupidity ! ” 

“Come and have lunch,” she said. 

My father had moved away from us ; he detested 
that sort of discussion. On the way back he took 

63 



my hand and held it. His liand was firm and 
comforting: it had dried my tears after my first 
disappointment in love, it had closed over mine in 
moments of tranquillity and perfect happiness, it 
had stealthily pie^^^ed mine at times of complicity or 
iiotous laughter. I thought of his hand on the 
steering wheel, or holding the keys at night and 
searching in vain for the lock ; his hand on a woman’s 
shoulder, or holding a cigarette, the hand tliat could 
do nothing more for me. I' gave it a hard squeeze. 
Turning towards mo, he snfiiled. 


64 



2 


T wo d. ys went by : I went round in circles, I 
wore myself oiK, but I could not free myself 
from the haunting thought that Anne was 
about to wreck our lives. I did not try to see Cyril; 
he would have a>nifoit''d me and made me happier, 
but that was not what I wanted. I even got a 
certain satisfaction from asking myself insoluble 
questions, by reminding myself of days gone by, and 
dreading those to come. It was very hot; my room 
was in semi-darkness with the shutters closed, but 
even so the air was unbearably heavy and damp. I 
lay on my bed staring at the ceiling, hardly moving 
except to search for a cool place on the sheet. I 
did not sleep, but played records on the gramophone 
at the foot of my bed. I chose slow rhythms, with- 
out any tune. I smoked a good deal and felt de- 
cadent, which gave me pletisure. But I was not 
deluded by this game of pretence. I was sad and 
bewildered. 

One afternoon the maid knocked at my door and 
announced witli an air of mystery “Someone’s 
downstairs.” I at once thought of Cyril and went 
down. It was not Cyril, but Elsa. She greeted 

65 



me effusively, li^ooking at her, I was astonished at 
her new beauty. She was tanned at last, evenly 
and smoothly, and was carefully made up and 
brilliantly youthful. 

“IVe come to fetch my suitcase,’’ she^ explained. 

Juan bought me a few dresses, but not jnough, and 
I need my things.” * 

I wondered for a moment who Juan could be, but 
did not enquire further. I was pleased Elsa had 
come back. She brought with her the aura of a kept 
woman, of bar’s, of gay evenifags, which reminded me 
of happier days. I told her how glad I was to see 
her again, and she assured me that we had always 
got on so well together because we had common 
interests. I suppressed a slight shudder and sug- 
gested that we should go up to my room to avoid 
meeting Anne and my father. When I mentioned 
my father slie made an involuntary movement willi 
her head, and I wondered whether perhaps she was 
still in love with him, in spite of Juan and the 
dresses. I also thought that three weeks before I 
would not have noticed that movement of hers. 

In my room I listened while she described in 
glowing terms her smart and dizzy life in the 
fashionable places along the Riviera. A strange 
confusion of thoughts went through my head, 
partly suggested by her different appearance. At 
last she stopped talking, perhaps because I was 

66 



silent. She took a few steps across the room, and 
without turning round asked in an off-hand way 
if Raymond was happy. In a moment I knew 
wliat I must say to her : 

“‘Happy’ is saying too much! Anne doesn’t 
give him a chance to think otherwise. She is very 
clever.” 

“Very 1 ” sighed Elsa. 

“ You’ll never guess what she’s persuaded him to 
do . . . she’s going to marry him. ...” 

Elsa turned a horrified face towards me: 

“Marry him? Raymond actually wants to get 
married ?” 

“Yes,” I answered. “Raymond is going to be 
married.” 

A sudden desire to laugh caught me by the throat. 
My hands were shaking. Elsa seemed prostrated, 
almost as if I had given her a knockout blow. On 
no account must she be allowed to realise that after 
all he was of an age to marry, and could not be 
expected to spend his life with women of her sort. 
I leant forward and suddenly lowered my voice to 
make a stronger impression on her : 

“It simply mustn’t happen, Elisa. He’s suffer- 
ing already. It’s an impossible state of affairs, as 
you can very well imagine.” 

“ Yes,” she said. 

She seemed fascinated. 


67 



“You’re just the person I’ve been waiting for,” 
I went on, “because you are the only one who 
is a match for Anne. You alone are up to her 
standard.” 

She seemed to swallow the bait. 

“But if he’s marrying her it must bc'^ because he 
loves her?” she objected. ^ 

“ But look here, Elsa, it’s you he loves ! Do you 
want to make me believe that you don’t know it?” 

I saw her bat her eyelids,' and she turned away 
to hide her pleasure, and tiie hope my words had 
given her. I was prompted by a sort of infallible 
instinct, and I knew just how to continue. 

“ Don’t you see ? Anne kept harping on the bliss 
of married life, morality, and all that, and in the end 
she caught him.” 

I was surprised at my own words. For oven 
though I had expressed myself somewhat crudely, 
that was just what I felt. 

“If they get married, our lives will be ruined, 
Elsa! My father must be protected, he’s nothing 
but a big baby ...” 

I repeated ‘a big baby’ with stronger emphasis. 
It seemed to me that I was being rather too melo- 
dramatic, but I saw Elsa’s beautiful green eyes fill 
with pity, and I ended up, like in a canticle : 

“Help me, Elsa! It’s for your own sake, for my 
father, and for the love between you.” 

68 



I added to myself: ^and for Johnny Chinaman!^ 

‘*But what can I do?^^ asked Elsa. ‘‘It seems an 
impossible situation.’* 

“If you think it’s impossible, then give up the 
idea,” I said sadly. 

“What aV. *tch! ” murmured Elsa. 

“You’ve hit the nail on the head,” I said, turning 
away to hide my expression. 

Elsa visibly brightened up. She had been jilted, 
and now she was goiA^ to show that adventuress 
just what she, Elsa Mackenbourg, could do. And 
my father loved her, as she had always known he 
did. Even while she had been with Juan she 
hadn’t been able to put Raymond out of her mind. 
She’d never as much as mentioned the word mar- 
riage to him, and she had never bored him either, 
and she’d never tried . . . but by now I could endure 
her no longer : 

“Elsa,” I said, “go and ask Cyril from me if 
you could possibly stay with his mother 5 say you 
are in need of hospitality. Tomorrow morning I’ll 
come and see him, and we’ll all three discuss the 
situation.” 

On the doorstep I added for a joke: “You are 
fighting for your own future, Elsa! ” 

She gravely acquiesced as if there were not fifteen 
or twenty ‘ futures ’ in store for her, Iii the shape of 
men who would keep her. I watclied her walking 

69 



away in the sunshine with her mincing steps. 1 
thought it would not be a week before my father 
wanted her back. 

It was half past three} 1 imagined my father 
asleep in Anne’s arms. I began to formulate plans 
one after another without pausing to tuink of my- 
self. I walked up and down in my room between 
the door and the window, looking out from time to 
time at the calm sea flattening out along the beach. 
I calculated risks, estimated possibilities, and gradu- 
ally I broke down every objection. I felt danger- 
ously clever, and the wave of self-disgust which had 
swept over me from the moment I had begun to 
talk to Elsa now gave place to a feeling of pride in 
my own capabilities. 

1 need hardly say that all this collapsed when we 
went down to bathe. As soon as I saw Anne, I was 
overcome by remorse and did my utmost to atone 
for my past behaviour. I carried her bag, I rushed 
forward with her wrap when she came out of the 
water. 1 smothered her with attention and said the 
nicest things. This sudden change after my silence 
of the past few days was naturally a surprise to her. 
My father was delighted, Anne smiled at me. I 
thought of the words I had used in speaking of her 
to Elsa. How could I have said them, and how 
could I have put up with Elsa’s nonsense? To- 
morrow I would advise her to go away, saying that 

70 



I had made a mistake. Eveiything; would be as 
before, and, after all, why should 1 not pass my 
examination? The baccalauriat was siu-e to come 
in useful. 

“Isn’t that so?” I asked Anne. “Isn’t it useful 
to get oiio'^lHiccalaureat}" 

She gave me a look and burst out laughing. I 
followed suit, happy to see her so gay. 

“You’re really incredible!” she exclaimed. 

I certainly was increj’lble, and she would have 
thought me even more so if she had known what I 
had been planning. I was dying to tell her all 
about it so that she should see how incredible I 
could be. I would have said: ‘Can you imagine 
that I was going to make Elisa pretend to be in love 
with Cyril; she was to go and stay in his house, and 
we would have seen them passing by on his boat; 
strolling in the wood or along the road. Elsa looks 
lovely again ; of course she hasn’t your beauty, hers 
is the flamboyant kind that makes men turn round. 
My father wouldn’t have stood it for long, he has 
never tolerated that a good-looking woman who had 
lived with him should console herself so soon, and, 
so to speak, before his very eyes, and above aU 
with a man younger than himself. You under- 
stand, Anne, he would have wanted her again very 
quickly even though he loves you, just in order to 
bolster up his morale. He’s very vain, or not very 

B.T. — 6 71 



sviie oi \v\inse\f, whichever way you like to put it. 
Elsa, under my direction, would have done all that 
wds> necessary. One day he would have been un- 
faithful to you and you couldn’t bear that, could 
you? You’re not one of those women who can 
share a man. So you w'ould have goijp away and 
that was exactly what 1 wdnted. It’s stupid, I 
know, but I was angry with you because of Bergson, 
of the heat; I somehow imagined ... I daren’t 
even teh you, it was so ri'^ioalous and unreal. On 
account of my haccalaure€it\ might have quarrelled 
with you for ever. But it’s useful to have one’s 
baccalaurdat all the same, isn’t it. ... ’ “ Isn’t it ? ” 

I said aloud. 

“What are you trying to say?” asked Anne. 
“That the haccalaureat is useful 

“Yes,” I replied. 

After all it was better not to tell her anything, 
perhaps she would not have understood. There 
were things Anne did not understand at all. I ran 
into the sea after my father and wrestled witli him. 
Once more I was able to enjoy frolicking in the 
water, for I had a good conscience. Tomorrow I 
would change my room; I would move up to the 
attic with my lesson books, but Bergson would not 
be among them; there was no need to overdo it! 
For two hours every day I would concentrate in soli- 
tude on my work. I imagined myself being success- 

72 



ful in October, and thought of my father’s aston- 
ished laugh, Anne’s approbation, my degree. I 
would be intelligent, cultured, somewhat aloof, like 
Anne. Perhaps I had intellectual gifts ? Hadn’t I 
been capable of producing a logical plan, despicable 
perhaps, b it logical ? And what about Elsa ? t 
had known how to appeal to her vanity and senti- 
mentality, and within a few minutes had managed 
to persaude her, when her onl^ object in coming had 
been to fetch a suitcase. I felt proud of myself: I 
had taken stock of Elsa’, found her weak spot, and 
carefully aimed my words. For the first time in my 
life I had known the intense pleasure of getting 
under another person’s skin. It was a new eicperi- 
encej in the past I had alv«iys been too impulsive, 
and whenever I had come close to someone, it had 
been inadvertently. Now, when I had caught a 
sudden glimpse of the marvellous mechanism of 
human reflexes, and the power of speech, I felt 
soriy that I had come to it through lies. The 
day might come when I would love someone 
passionately, and would have to search warily 
and gently to find the way to Him. 


75 



5 


W alking down to Cyril’s villa the next 
morning, I felt fai* less sure of myself. 
To celebrate my recovery I had drunk too 
much at dinner the night before, and had been 
rather more than gay. I hod told my father that 
I was going to take my de^ee, and would associate 
in future only with highbrows^ that I wanted to 
become famous and a thorough bore. 1 said he 
must make use of every scandalous trick known to 
publicity in order to launch me. Roaring with 
laughter, we exchanged the most far-fetched ideas. 
Anne laughed too, but indulgently and not so 
loudly. When I became too extravagant, she 
stopped laughing altogether, but our hilarious fun 
had put my father into such a happy frame of mind 
that she said nothing. At last they went to bed, 
after tucking me up. I thanked them from the 
bottom of my heart, and asked what I would do 
without them. My father had no answer, but Anne 
seemed to have very decided views on the subject. 
Just as she leaned over to speak to me, I fell asleep. 
In the middle of the night I was sick, and my 
awakening the next morning was the worst I could 

74 



ever remember. Still feeling very muzzy and in 
low spirits, I walked slowly towards the wood, but 
had no eyes for the sea, or for the skimming swallows. 

Cyril was at the garden gate. He rushed towards 
me, took me in his arms, and held me tightly, talk- 
ing incoherently ; 

“I was so worried. Darling . . . it’s been so long 
... I had no idea what you were doing, or if that 
woman was making you unhappy ... I’ve never 
been so miserable. . . . Several times I spent all 
the tifternoon near your creek ... I didn’t know T 
loved you so much. ...” 

“Neither did I.” 

To tell the truth, I was both surprised and 
touched, but I could harcfly express my emotion 
because 1 felt so sick. 

“How pale you are,” he said. “From now on 
I’m going to look after you. I won’t let you be ill- 
treated any more.” 

I recognised Elsa’s exaggerations, and asked C 3 rril 
what his mother thought of her. 

“I introduced her as a friend of yours, an orphan. 
As a matter of fact she’s very nice, she told me all 
about that woman. How strange it seems that, 
with a face like hers, she should be such an adven- 
turess.” 

“Elsa is too sensational,” I said weakly. “But I 
was going to tell her ...” 


75 



“I too, have something to tell you,” interrupted 
Cyril. “ Cdcile, I want to marry you.” 

I had a moment of panic. 1 absolutely had to 
do or say something. If only I had not felt so ill ! 

“I love you,” said Cyril, speaking into my hair. 
“I’ll give up studying law, an uncle ha^ offered me 
an interesting job. I’m twenly-six. f’m not a boy 
any longer ; I am quite serious. What do you say ? ’ ’ 

I tried desperately to think of a non-commital, 
high-sounding phrase. I did not want to marry 
him. I loved him, but marriage was out of the 
question. I had no intention of marrying anyone. 
I was tired. 

“It’s quite impossible,” I stammered. “My 
father ...” 

“I’ll manage your father,” said Cyril. 

“Anne wouldn’t approve,” I said. “She doesn’t 
think I’m grown-up. If she says no, my father 
wiU say the same. I’m exhausted, Cyril. All this 
emotion wears me out. Here’s Elsa! ” 

She was wearing a dressing-gown, and looked 
fresh and radiant. I felt dull and thin. They both 
seemed to be overflowing with health and high 
spirits, which depressed me even more. She 
treated me as though I had come out of prison, and 
fussed over me, while I sat down. 

“How is Raymond?” she asked. “Does he 
know that I’m back?” 

76 



She had the happy smile of one wlio lias forgiven 
and is full of hope. How could I tell her that my 
father had forgotten her, and explain to Cyril that 
I did not want to marry him ? I shut my eyes. Cyril 
went to fetch some coffee. Elsa talked on and on. 

• 

Slie obviously thought me a very subtle person in 
whom she could have confidence. The coffee was 
strong and aromatic, the sun w^as hot; I began to 
feel a little better. 

‘‘I’ve thought and thovght, but without finding 
a solution,” said Elsa. 

“There isn’t one,” said Cyril. “It’s an infatua- 
tion; there’s nothing to be done.” 

“Oh yes there is!” I said. “You Just haven’t 
any imagination.” 

It flattered me to see how they hung on my words. 
They w ere ten years older than I, and they had no 
ideas. I said with a superior air; 

“It is a question of psychology.” 

I went on to explain my plan. They raised the 
same objections as I had done myself the day before, 
and I felt a particular pleasure in refuting them. I 
got excited all over again, in my effort to convince 
them that it was feasible. It only remained for me 
to prove to them that it ought not to be carried 
out, but for this I could not find any logical 
argument. 

“I don’t like that kind of intrigue,” said Cyril 

77 



reluctantly. “ But if it is the only way to make you 
marry me, I’ll do it.” 

“ It’s not exactly Anne’s fault,” I said. 

“You know very well that if she stays you’ll 
have to marry the man she chooses,” said 
Elsa. 

Perhaps it was true. I could see Anne intro- 
ducing me on my twentieth birthday to a young 
man with a degree to match my own, assured of a 
brilliant future, steady ai>d faithful. In fact some- 
one like Cyril himself. I began to laugh. 

“Please don’t laugh,” said Cyril. “Tell me that 
you’ll be jealous when I’m pretending to be in love 
with Elsa. How can you bear the thought of it for 
one moment ? Do you^ove me ? ” 

He spoke in a low voice. Elsa had gone off and 
discreetly left us alone. I looked at Cyril’s tense 
brown face, his dark eyes. It gave me a strange 
feeling to think he loved me. I looked at his red 
lips, SO near mine. I did not feel intellectual any 
longer. He came closer, our lips met and he kissed 
me passionately. I realised that I was more gifted 
for kissing a young man in the sunshine than for 
taking a degree. I drew away from him, gasping 
for breath: 

'‘C^cile, let’s stay together for ever! In the 
meantime I’ll carry out the plan with Elsa.” 

I wondered if I was right in my reckoning. As 


78 



I was tlie instigator of the whole thing I could 
always stop it. 

“ You’re full of ideas,” said C3Til with his slanting 
smile that lifted one side of his mouth and gave him 
the appearance of a handsome bandit. 

And that is how I set the whole comedy in 
motion, against my better judgement. Sometimes 
I think I would blame myself less if I had been 
prompted that day by hatred and violence, and had 
not allowed myself to*drlit into it merely through 
inertia, the sun, and Cyril’s kisses. 

When I left the conspirators at the end of an hour, 
I was rather perturbed. However, there were still 
grounds for reassurance: my plan could misfire 
because my father’s passiofla for Anne might well 
keep him faithful to her, besides which, neither 
Cyril nor Elsa could do much without my con- 
nivance. If my father showed any signs of falling 
into the trap, I would find some means of putting 
an end to the whole thing. But still it was amusing 
to try the plan out, and see whether my psycho- 
logical judgement proved right or wrong. 

WTiat is more, Cyril was in love with me and had 
asked me to marry him. This was enough to make 
me forget everything else. If he could wait two 
years, to give me time to grow up, I would accept 
him. I could already imagine myself living with 
Cyril, sleeping next to him, never leaving him. 

79 



Every Sunday we would go to lunch ^\ith Anne and 
my fatlier, a united married couple, and sometimes 
perhaps include Cyril’s mother, which would add 
a homely atmosphere to the meal. 

I met Anne on tlie terrace on her way down to the 
beach to join my father. She received mt with the 
ironical smile wdth which one greets those who ha\ e 
drunk too much the night before. I asked her what 
she had been going to tell me just as I fell asleep, but 
she only laughed and sai<ihit might make me cross. 
Just then my father came out of the water. He was 
broad and muscular, and I thought he looked won- 
derful. I bathed with Anne, who swam slowly with 
her head well out of the water so as not to wet her 
hair. Afterwards w^e three lay side by side on our 
stomachs in the sand, with me in the middle. We 
weie quiet and peaceful. 

Just then the boat appeared round the rocks, all 
sails set. My father was the first to see it. 

“So Cyril couldn’t hold out any longer!” he said 
laughing. “Shall we lorgi\e him, Anne? After 
all he’s a nice boy.” 

I raised my head, scenting danger. 

“But what is he up to?” said my father. “He’s 
not coming in after all. Ah! He’s not alone.” 

Anne had also turned to look. The boat was 
going to pass right in front of us before tacking. I 
could make out Cyril’s face. Silently I prajed that 

80 



he would go away, but I could already hear my 
father’s exclamation of surprise : 

“But it’s Elsa! What on earth is she doing 
there?” 

He turned to Anne: “That girl is extraordinary! 
She must already have got her claws into that poof 
boy and made the oIq lady accept her.” 

But Anne was not listening; she was watching me. 
I saw her and hid my face in the sand to cover my 
shame. She put out .he' hand and touched rny 
neck : 

“ Look at me. Are you angry with me ?” 

I opened my eyes. She bent over me anxiously 
and almost imploringly. For the first time she was 
treating me as a sensible, tltinking person, and just 
on the day when ... I groaned and jerked my head 
round towards my father to free myself from that 
hand. He was watching the boat. 

“ My poor child,” Anne was saying in a low voice. 
“Poor little Cdcile! I’m afraid it is all my fault. 
Perhaps I shouldn’t have been so hard on you. I 
never wanted to hurt you, do you believe me?” 

She gently stroked my hair and neck. I kept 
quite still. I had the same feeling as when a reced- 
ing wave dragged the sand away beneath me. 
Neither anger nor desire had ever worked so strongly 
in me as my longing at that moment for utter de- 
feat. My one wish was to give up all my plans and 

81 



put myself entirely into her hands for the rest of my 
life. I had never before been so overcome with a 
sense of my utter impotence. I closed my eyes. It 
seemed to me that my heart ^topped beating. 


82 



4 


S o far my father had shown no feeling other than 
surprise* The maid told him that Elsa had 
been to fetch her suitcase, but said nothing 
about our conversation. Being a peasant woman 
with a romantic turn of mind, she must have 
relished the various changes that had taken place 
in our household since she had been with us, 
especially in the bedrooms. 

My father and Anne, in their effort to make 
amends, were so kind to ms that at first I found it 
unbearable. However, I soon changed my mind, for 
even tliough I had brought it on myself, I did not 
find it very agreeable to see Cyril and Elsa walking 
about arm-in-arm, showing every sign of pleasure 
in each other’s company. I could no longer go 
sailing myself, but I could watch Elsa as she passed 
by; her hair blown by the wind, as mine used to be. 
It was easy enough for me to look unconcerned 
when we met, as we did at every corner: in the 
wood, in the village, and on the road. Anne would 
glance at me, start a new topic of conversation, and 
put her hand on my shoulder to comfcirt me. Have 
I ever mentioned how kind she was ? Whether her 


83 



kindness emanated from her intelligence, or was 
merely part of her detachment, I do not know, but 
slie had an unerring instinct for the right word, and 
if I had really been unhappy, I could hardly have 
found better support. 

As my father gave no signs of jealousy, I was not 
unduly worried, and allowed things 'to drift; but 
wliile it proved to me how fond he was of Anne, I 
felt rather annoyed that my plan had misfired. 
One day he and I wefe on our way to the post- 
office when we passed Elisa. She pretended not 
to see us, and my fatlier turned round after her with 
a ^’^histle of surprise, as if she had been a stranger: 

‘‘I say! Hasn’t she become a beauty!” 

‘•Love seems to agre^^ with her,” I remarked. 

He looked rather astonished- “You’re taking it 
\ery well, I must say!” 

“What can one do'^ They’re the same age. I 
Mippose it was inevitable.” 

“If Anne hadn’t come along, it wouldn’t have 
been inevitable at alL” he said angrily. “You 
don’t think I’d let a boy like that snatch a woman 
from me without my consent ?” 

“All the same, age tells! ” I said solemnly. 

He shrugged his shoulders. On the way back I 
noticed he was preoccupied: perhaps he was think- 
ing that both Cyril and Elsa were young, and that in 
marr) ing a woman of his own age, he would cease 

84 



to belong to the category of men whose age does 
not count. I liad a momentary feeling of triumph, 
but when I saw the tiny wrinkles at tlie corners of 
Anne’s eyes, and the fine lines round her mouth, I 
felt ashamed of myself. It was only too easy to 
follow my impulses and repent afterwards. 

A week w'ent by. Cyril and Elsa, who had no 
idea how matters were progressing, must have been 
expecting me every day. I was afraid to go and 
see them in case they tempted me to try anything 
new. Every aftf'rnoon I went up to my room, 
ostensibly to work, but in fact I did nothing: I had 
found a book on Yoga, and spent my time practising 
various exercises. I took care to smother my laugh- 
ter in case Anne should heab it. I told her I was 
working hard; and I pretended that my disappoint- 
ment in love had made me keen to get my degree as 
a consolation. I hoped tliis would raise me in her 
estimation, and I even went so far as to quote Kant 
at table, to my father’s dismay. 

One afternoon I had wrapped myself in bath 
towels to look like a Hindu, and was sitting cross- 
legged staring at myself in the mirror, liopiiig to 
achieve a Yoga-like trance, wdien there was a knock 
at the door. I thought it was the maid and told 
her to come in. 

It was Anne. For a moment she remained trans- 
fixed in the doorway, then she smiled : 


85 



“What are you playing at?” 

“Yoga,” I replied. “But it’s not a game at all, 
it’s a Hindu philosophy.” 

She went to the table and took up my book. I 
began to be alarmed. It lay open, and every page 
was covered with remaiks in my handwriting, such 
as ‘Impracticable’, ‘Exhausting’. 

“You are certainly conscientious,” she said. 
“And what about that essay on Pascal? I don’t 
see it anywhere.” ‘ 

At lunch I had been talking about Pascal, imply- 
ing that I had worked on a certain passage, but 
needless to say 1 had not written a word. Anne 
waited for me to say something, but as I did not 
reply she understood. 

“ It is your own affair if you play the fool up here 
instead of working, but it’s quite another matter 
when you lie to your father and me. In any case I 
found it difficult to believe in your sudden intellec- 
tual activity.” 

She went out of the room leaving me petrified 
in my bath towels. I could not understand why 
she had used the word ‘lie’. I had spoken of 
Pascal because it amused me, and had mentioned 
an essay to give her pleasure, and now she blamed 
me for it. I had grown used to her new attitude 
towards me, and her contempt made me feel 
humiliated and furious. I threw off my disguise, 

86 



pulled on some slacks and an old shirt and rushed out 
of the house. The heat was terrific, but I began to 
run, impelled by my anger, which was all the more 
violent because it was mixed with shame. I ran 
all the way to Cyril’s villa, only stopping when ^ 
reached the door to regain my breath. In the 
afternoon heat the houses seemed unnaturally 
large and quiet, and full of secrets. I went up to 
Cyril’s room; he had shown it to me the day we 
visited his mother. I 'opened the door. He was 
lying across the bed, fast asleep with his nead or 
his arm. I stood looking at him and for the first 
time he appeared to me defenceless and rather 
touching. 1 called him in a low voice. He opened 
his eyes and sat up at once. 

“You, Cdcile? What’s the matter.” 

I signed to him not to talk so loudly. Suppose his 
mother were to come and find me in his roo m ? She 
might think . . . anyone might think ... I sud- 
denly felt panic-stricken and moved towards the door. 

“But where are you off to?” he cried. “Come 
here, Cdcile!” 

He caught me by the arm and laughingly held 
me back. I turned round to him, and saw him grow 
pale, as I must have been myself. He let go my 
wrist, only to take me in his arms and draw me 
over to the bed. The thought that it had to happen 
sometime flashed through my confused mind. 

B.T. — 7 


87 



I stayed with him for about an hour. I was 
happy, but bewildered. I was used to hearing the 
word love bandied about, and I had often mentioned 
it rather crudely as one does when one is young and 
ignorant, but now I felt I could never talk of it 
again in that detached and vulgar way. Cyril, 
lying beside me, was talking about marrying me 
and how we would be together always. My silence 
made him uneasy. 1 sat up, looked at him, and 
called him my lover. 1 kissed the vein on his neck, 
murmuring “ Darling, darling Cyril ! ” I was not sure 
whether it was love I felt for him at that moment, I 
ha\ e always been fickle, and I have no wish to delude 
myself on this point, but just then I loved him more 
than myself} I would hkve sacrificed my life for him. 
He asked me when I left if I was angry with him. 
I laughed : how could I possibly be angry ? 

1 walked slowly back through the pine trees; I had 
a-'ked Cyril not to come with me, it would have been 
too rioky. In any case I was afraid something might 
show in my face or manner. Anne was lying in 
liont of the house on a deck chair, reading. 
I had a story all ready to explain where I had 
been, but she said nothing, she never asked ques- 
tions. 'Then I remembered that we had quarrelled, 
and I sat down near her in dead silence. I re- 
mained motionless, aware of my own breathing and 
the trembling of my fingers, and thinking of Cyril. 

88 



1 fetched a dgarette from the table and struck a 
match. It went out. With shaking hands I 
lighted another, and although there was no wind, 
it too went out. In exasperation I took a third, and 
for some reason this match assumed a vital import* 
ance; perhaps because Anne was watching me 
intently. Suddenly everything around me seemed 
to melt away and there was nothing left but the 
match between my fingers, the box, and Anne’s 
eyes boring into m®. My heart was beating 
violently. I tightened my fingers round the match 
and struck it, but as I bent forward my cigarette 
put it out. The matchbox dropped to the ground 
and I could feel Anne’s hard, searching gaze upon 
me. The tension was unbearable. Then her hands 
were under my chin, and as she raised my face I shut 
my eyes tightly for fear she should read their expres- 
sion and see the tears welling up. She stroked my 
cheek, andhalf reluctantly let me go, as if she preferred 
toleave the matter in abeyance. Tlien she put a lighted 
cigarette into my mouth and returned to her book. 

Perhaps the incident was symbolic. Sometimes 
when I am groping for a match, I find myself think- 
ing of that strange moment when my hands no 
longer seemed to belong to me, and once again I 
remember the intensity of Anne’s look, and the 
emptiness around me. 


89 



5 


T he incident I have just described was not 
without its aftermath. ‘ Like certain people 
who are very self-controlled and sure of them- 
selves, Anne would not make concessions j and when, 
on the terrace, she had let me go, she was acting 
against her principles. She had of course guessed 
something, and it would have been easy enough for 
her to make me talk, but at the last moment she 
had given in to pity or indifference. It was just as 
hard for her to make allowances for my short- 
comings, as to try to improve them, in both cases she 
was merely prompted by a sense of duty: in marry- 
ing my father she felt she must also take charge of 
me. I would have found it easier to accept her 
constant disapproval if she had sometimes shown 
exasperation, or any other feeling which went more 
than skin deep. One gets used to other people’s 
faults if one does not feel it a duty to correct them. 
Within a few months she would have ceased to 
trouble about me and her indifference might then 
have been tempered by affection. This attitude 
would just have suited me. But it could never 
happen with her, because her sense of responsibility 

90 



was too strong, espedally as I was young enough to 
be influenced; I was malleable, though obstinate. 

Therefore she had a feeling of frustration where 
I was concerned, she was angry with herself, and 
she let me know it. A few days later we were at 
dinner when the con^versial subject of my holiday 
task cropped* up. I let myself go, and even my 
father showed annoyance, but in the end it was 
Anne who locked me up in my room, although she 
had not even raised her voice during the argument. 
I had no idea what she had done until I tried to 
leave the room to fetch a glass of water. I had 
never been locked up in my life, and at first I 
panicked. I rushed over to the window, but there 
was no escape that way. 'Then I threw myself 
against the door so violently that I bruised my 
shoulder. With my teeth clenched I tried to 
force the lock with a pair of tweezers, but I did 
not want to call anyone to open it. After that I 
stood still in the middle of the room and collected my 
thoughts, and gradually I became quite calm. It 
was my first experience of cruelty; the thought of it 
lay like a stone on my heart, until it formed the 
central point of my resistance. 1 sat on my bed 
and began to plan my revenge. Soon I was so 
engrossed that several times I went to the door, and 
was surprised to find that I could not get out. 

At six o’clock my father came to release me. I 

91 



got up when he came in, and smiled at him. He 
looked at me in silence. 

“Do you want to talk to me?” he asked. 

“What about?” I said. “You know we both 
have a horror of explanations that lead nowhere.” 

He seemed relieved: “But^do try to be nicer to 
Anne, more patient.” 

I was taken aback. Why should he expect me 
to be patient with Anne ? 1 suddenly realised that 
he thought of Anne as a woman he was imposing 
on me, instead of the contrary. There was evi- 
dently still room for hope. 

“I was horrid,” I said. “I’ll apologise to her.” 

“You’re not unliappy, are you?” 

“ Of course not ! ” I replied. “And anyhow if we 
quarrel too often, I shall just marry a little earlier, 
that’s all! ” I knew my words would strike home. 

“ You mustn’t look at it in that way, you’re not 
Snow-White! Could you bear to leave me so 
soon? We should only have had two yeeirs to- 
gether.” 

The thought was as unbearable for me as for 
him. I could see myself crying on his shoulder, 
bewailing our lost happiness. I did not want to go 
too far. 

“I’m exaggerating, you know. With a few con- 
cessions on both sides, Anne and I will get on all 
right.” 

92 



“ Yes,” he said. “ Of course ! ” 

He must have thought, as 1 did at that moment, 
that the concessions would probably not be mutual, 
but would be on my side only. 

“You see,” I told him, “I realise very well that 
Anne is always righ^^. Her life is really far more 
successful th&n ours, and has greater depth.” 

He started to protest, but I went on: 

“In a month or two, I shall have completely 
assimilated Anne’s ideas, and there won’t be any 
more stupid arguments between us. It just need-; 
patience.” 

He was obviously startled. He was not only 
losing a boon companion, but a slice of his past as 
well. 

“Now don’t exaggerate!” he said in a weak 
voice. “I know that the kind of life you have led 
with me was perhaps not suitable for your age, or 
mine either, for that matter, but it was neither didl 
nor unhappy. After all, we’ve never been bored 
or depressed during the last two years, have we? 
There’s no need to be so drastic, just because Anne’s 
conception of life is different.” 

“On the contrary,” I said firmly. “We’ll have 
to go even further and give up our old way of 
life altogether!” 

“I suppose so,” said my poor father as tve went 
downstairs together. 


93 



I made my apologies to Anne without the slightest 
embarrassment. She told me that I needn’t have 
bothered} the heat must have been the cause of our 
di'ipute. I felt gay and indifferent. 

I met Cyril in the wood as arranged. I told him 
^bat to do next. He listened to me with a mixture 
of dread and admiration, 'then he took me in his 
arms, but I could not stay, as it was getting late. I 
was surprised to find that I did not want to leave 
him. If he had been searching for some means of 
attaching me to himself, he had certainly found it. 
I kissed him passionately, I even longed to hurt 
him, so that he would not be able to forget me for 
a single moment all the evening, and dream of me 
all night long. I could*not bear the thought of the 
night without him. 


94 



6 


T he next morniiig I took my father for a walk 
along Ihe road. We talked gaily of insignifi- 
cant things. I suggested going back to the 
villa by way of the pine wood. It was exactly half- 
past ten; I was on time. My father walked in 
front of me on the narrow path and pushed aside the 
brambles, so that I should not scratch my legs. 
IMien he stopped dead in his tracks I knew he had 
seen them. I went up to him; Cyril and Elsa 
were lying apparently asleep on the pine needles. 
Although they were acting entirely on my instruc- 
tions, and I knew very well that they were not in 
love, they were nevertheless both young and beauti- 
ful, and I could not help feeling a pang of jealousy. 
I noticed that my father had become abnormally 
pale. I took him by the arm : 

“ Don’t let’s disturb them. Come on ! ” 

He glanced once more at Elsa, who was looking 
particularly pretty with her red hair spread out, 
and a half-smile on her lips; then he turned on his 
heel and walked on at a brisk pace. I could hear 
him muttering: “The bitch! The bitch!’* 

“IVhy do you say that? She’s free, isn’t she?’* 

95 



“That’s not the point! Did you find it very 
pleasant to see her in Cyril’s arms?” 

“I don’t love him any more,” I said. 

“Neither do I love Elsa,” he answered furiously. 
“But it hurts all the same. After all, I’ve lived 
with her, which makes it even^worse.” 

I knew very well what he meant. He must have 
felt like dashing up to separate them and seizing 
his property, or what had once been his property. 
“ Supposing Anne were to hear you ? ” 

“Whdt do you mean? Well, of course, she 
wouldn’t understand, she’d be shocked, that’s 
normal enough I But what about you ? Don’t 
YOU understand me any more? Are you shocked 
too?” 

How easy it was for me to steer his thoughts in 
tlie direction I wanted! It was rather frightening 
to know him so well. 

“Of course I’m not shocked,” I said. “But you 
must see things as they are: Elsa has a short 
memory, shf* finds Cynl attractive, and that’s the 
end of it as far as you’re concerned. After all, look 
how you behaved to her, it was unforgivable! ” 

“ If I wanted her ...” my father began, and then 
stopped short. 

“You’d have no luck,” I said convincingly, as if 
it were the most natural thing in the woild for me 
to discuss his chances of getting Elsa back. 

96 



“Anyhow it is out of the question,” he said in a 
more resigned voice. 

“ Of course it is ! ” I answered with a shrug of my 
shoulders, which was meant to convey that he, poor 
chap, was out of the running now. He said not 

another word until we reached the house. Then 

* 

he took Anue into his arms and held her close to 
him. She was sm-prised, but gladly submitted to 
bis embrace. I went out of the room trembling 
with shame. 

At two o’clock I heeird a soft whistle, and went 
down to join Cyril on the beach. We got into the 
boat and sailed out to sea. There was nothing in 
sight, no-one else was out in that heat. When we 
were some way from the shdre, he lowered the sail. 
So far we had hardly exchanged a word. 

“ This Tnnrning ...” he began. 

“Please don’t talk about it!” I said. 

He gently pushed me down in the boat. I could 
feel it swaying as we made love; the sky seemed to 
be falling onto us. I spoke to him, but he made no 
reply, there was no need. Afterwards there was the 
tang of salt water. We sunbathed, laughed and 
wei e happy. Wo had the sun and the sea, laughter 
and love : I wonder if we shall ever again recapture 
the particular flavour and brilliance of those days, 
heightened as they were for me by an undercurrent 
of fear and remorse ? 


97 



The time passed quickly. 1 almost forgot Anne, 
my father, and Elsa. Through love I had entered 
another world: I felt dreamy, yet wide awake, 
peaceful and contented. Cyril asked me if 1 was not 
afraid. 1 told him that I was entirely his, and he 
seemed satisfied that it should be so. Perhaps I 
had given myself to him so easily because I knew 
that if I had a child, he would be prepared to take 
the blame, and shoulder all the responsibility: this 
was something I could never* face. For once I was 
thankful that my immaturity made it unlikely. 

But Elsa was growing impatient. She plied me 
with questions. I was always afraid of being seen 
with her or Cyril. She lay in wait for my father at 
every corner, and foifdly imagined that he \ad 
difficulty in keeping away from her. I was sur- 
prised that someone who hovered so precariously 
between love and money should get romantic ideas, 
and be excited by a look or movement, when such 
things must otherwise have been merely routine for 
her. The r61e she was playing evidently seemed to 
her the height of psychological subtlety. 

Even if my father was becoming gradually ob- 
se<«ed with the thought of Elsa, Anne did not seem 
to notice it. He was more affectionate and demon- 
strative than ever with her, wliich frightened me, 
because I attributed it to his subconscious remorse. 
In three weeks we should be back in Paris, and the 

98 



main thing was that nothing should happen before 
then. Elsa would be out of oiu* way, and my father 
and Anne would get married if by then they had 
not changed their minds. In Paris I would hare 
Cyril, and just as Anne had been unable to keep us 
apart here, so she wjuld find it impossible to stop* 
me from seeing him once we were home. Cyril 
had a room of his own away from his mother’s 
house. I could already picture ourselves there to- 
gether, the window wide open to the wonderful 
pink and blue sky of Paris, pigeons cooing cn the 
bars outside, and Cyril with me on the narrow bed. 


99 



7 


A few days later my fathfr received a message 
from one of our friends asking us to meet 
. him in St. Raphael for a drink. He was so 
pleased at the thought of escaping for a while from 
the unnatural seclusion in 'which we were living 
that he could hardly wait to tell m the news. I 
mentioned to Elsa and C)Til that we would be at the 
Bar du Soleil at seven o’clock and if they liked to 
come, they would see us there. Unfortunately Elsa 
happened to know our friend, which made her all 
the more keen to go. I realised that there might 
be complications, and tried in vain to put her off. 

“Charles Webb simply adores me,” she said with 
childlike simplicity. “If he sees me, he’s sure to 
make Raymond want to come back to me.” 

Cyril did not care whether he went to St. Raphael 
or not. I saw by the way he looked at me that he 
only wanted to be near me, and I felt proud. 

At six o’clock we drove off in Anne’s car. It was 
a huge American ‘convertible’, which she kept 
more for publicity tlian to suit her own taste, but it 
suited mine down to the ground, writh all its shining 
gadgets. Another advantage was that we could all 

100 



three sit iu front, and I never feel so friendly as 
when I am in a car, sharing the same pleasures, and 
perhaps even the same death. Anne was at the 
wheel, as if symbolising her future place in the 
family. This was the first time I had been in her 
car since the evening, we went to Cannes. 

We met Charles Webb and his wife at the Bar 
du Soleil. He was concerned with theatrical pub- 
licity, while his wife spent all his earnings on enter- 
taining young men. Money was an obsession with 
him, he thought of nothing else in his unceasing 
effort to make ends meet} hence his restless im- 
patience. He had been Elsa’s lover for a long lime, 
and she had suited him quite well, because, though 
very pretty, she was not pafticularly grasping. 

His wife was a malicious woman. Anne had 
never met her, and I noticed that her lovely face 
quickly assumed the disdainful, mocking expression 
that was habitual to her in society. As usual 
Charles Webb talked all the time, now and then 
giving Anne an inquisitive look. He evidently 
wondered what she was doing with that Don Juan 
Raymond and his daughter I was glad to think 
he would soon find out. Just then my father leant 
forward and said abruptly: 

“I have news for you, old chap: Anne and I are 
getting married on the 5th of October.” 

Webb looked from one to the other in amazement } 

101 



his wife, who had rather a weakness for my father, 
seemed disconcerted. 

After a pause, Webb shouted: “Congratulations! 
What a splendid idea! My dear lady, you don’t 
know what you’re taking on, you are wonderful! 
here waiter ! We must celebrate.” 

Anne smile quietly and indifferently. Then I 
saw Webb’s face light up, and I did not turn round : 

“Elsa! Good Heavens, it’s Elsa Mackenbourg! 
She hasn’t seen me jet. I say Raymond, do you 
see how lovely that girl has grown?” 

“Hasn’t she!” said my father in a proprietary 
voice, but then he remembered and his face 
fell. 

Anne could hardly help noticing the inflection in 
his voice. She turned to me with a quick move- 
ment, but before she could speak I leant towards her 
and said in a confidential whisper, loud enough for 
my father to hear: 

“Amie, you’re causing quite a sensation. 
There’s a man over there who can’t take his eyes 
off you.” 

My father twisted round to look at the man in 
question : 

“I won’t have that sort of thing! ” he said, taking 
Anne’s hand. 

“Aren’t they sweet?” exclaimed Madame Webb, 
ironically. “Charles, \se really shouldn’t have 

102 



disturbed them; it would have been better to have 
invited Cdcile by herself.” 

“She wouldn’t have come,” I said unhesitatingly. 

“Why not? Are you in love with one of the 
fishermen?” 

She had once seen me in conversation with a bus 
conductor, and ever since had treated me as though 
I had lost caste. 

“Why yes, of course!” I said with an effort to 
appear gay. 

“And do you go out fisliing a lot ? ” 

She thought she was being funny, which made it 
even worse. I was beginning to get angry, but 
did not know what to answer without being too 
offensive. There was dead silence. Anne’s voice 
interposed quietly: 

“Raymond, would you mind asking the waiter to 
bring me a straw to drink my orange juice?” 

Charles Webb began to talk feverishly about 
refreshing drinks. Anne gave me a look of en- 
treaty. We all decided .o dine together as though 
we had narrowly escaped a scene. 

At dinner I drank far too much. I wanted to 
forget Anne’s anxious expression when she looked 
at my father, and the hint of gratitude in her eyes 
whenever they rested on me. Every time Madame 
Webb made a dig at me I gave her an ingratiating 
smile. This seemed to upset lie^, and she soon 

B.T.— 8 103 



became openly aggressive. Anne signed to me to 
keep qiiiet, she had a horror of scenes in public, and 
Madame Webb seemed to be on the point of creating 
one. For my part I was used to them. Among our 
associates they were frequent, so I was not disturbed 
*by the prospect. 

After dinner we went to another bar. Soon 
Elsa and Cyril turned up. Elsa was talking very 
loudly as she entered the room followed by poor 
Cyril. 1 thought she Vvas behaving badly, but she 
was pretty enough to carry it off. 

“Who’s that puppy she’s with?” asked Charles 
Webb. “He’s rather young, isn’t he?” 

“It’s love that keeps him young!” simpered his 
wife. ‘ 

“Don’t you believe it!” said my father. “It’s 
just an infatuation.” 

I had my eyes on Anne. She was watching Elsa 
in the calm, detached way she looked at very young 
women, or at the mannequins parading her collec- 
tion. For a moment I admired her passionately for 
showing no trace of jealousy or spite, but how could 
she be jealous, I wondered, when she herself was a 
hundred times more beautiful and intelligent than 
Elsa? As I was very drunk, I told her so. She 
looked at me curiously : 

“Do you really think I am more beautiful than 
Elsa?” 

104 



“Of coiirse!” 

“That is always pleasant to hear, but you are 
drinking too much. Give me your glass. I hope 
it doesn’t upset you to see Cyril here ? Anyway he 
seems bored to death.” 

“He’s my lover,” I said with gay abandon. 

“You are quite drunk. Fortunately it’s time to 
go home.” 

It was a relief to part from the Webbs. I found 
it difficult to say goodbye polilely . My father drove, 
and my head lolled onto Anne’s shoulder. 

I began to reflect how much I preferred her to the 
people we usually saw, that she was infinitely 
superior to them in every way. My father said 
very little, perhaps he was thinking of Elsa. 

“Is she sleeping?” he asked Anne. 

“As peacefully as a baby. She didn’t behave 
badly on the whole, did she?” 

They were silent for a while, then I heard his 
voice again : 

“Anne, I love youj only you. Do you belieA'e 
me?” 

“ Don’t tell me so often, it fr.-ghtens me.” 

“ Give me your hand.” 

I almost sat up to protest : ‘ For heaven’s sake, not 
on the Corniche ! ’, but 1 was too drunk, and half 
asleep. Besides there was Anne’s perfume, the sea 
breeze in my hair, the tiny gi'az** on my shoulder 

105 



which was a reminder of Cyril; all these reasons 
to be happy and keep quiet. 1 thought of Elsa and 
Cyril setting off on the motor cycle which had been 
a birthday present from his mother. I felt so sorry 
for them that I almost cried. Anne’s car was made 
for sleeping, so well spnu'g, ]pot noisy like a motor 
bike. I thought of Madame Webb* lying awake 
at night. No doubt at her age I would also have to 
pay someone to love me, because love is the most 
wonderful thing in the world. What does the price 
matter? The important thing was not to become 
embittered and jealous, as she was of Elsa and Anne. 
I began to laugh softly to myself. Anne moved 
her shoulder to make a comfortable hollow for me. 
“Go to sleep,” she ordered. I went to sleep. 


106 



8 


T he next morn>ng I woke up feeling perfectly 
well except for a slight ache in my neck. My 
bed was flooded with sunshine as it was every 
morning. I threw back the sheets and exposed my 
bare back to the sun. It was warm and comforting, 
and seemed to penetrate my very bones. I vlecided 
to spend the morning like that, without moving. 

In my mind I went over the events of the evening 
before. I remembered telling Anne that Cyril was 
my lover. It amused me'^to think that one can 
tell the truth when one is drunk an.l nobody will 
believe it. I thought about Madame Webb. I was 
used to that sort of woman : in her milieu and at her 
age they often become odious through their self- 
indulgence } Anne’s calm dignity had shown her 
up as even more idiotic and boring than usual. It 
was only to be expected j I could not imagine any- 
one among my father’s friends who would for a 
moment bear comparison with Anne. In order to 
be able to face an evening with people like that, one 
had either to be rather drunk, or be on intimate 
terms with one or other of them. For my father it 
was more simple: Charles Wobb and he were 

107 



libertines: “Guess whom I’m taking out tonight? 
The Mars girl, the one in Saurel’s latest film.” My 
father would laugh, and clap him on the back: 
“Lucky man! She’s almost as pretty as ^llise.” 
Undergraduate talk, but I liked their enthusiasm. 

Then there were interminable evenings on cafe 
terraces, and Lombeird’s tales of woe ; “ She was the 
only one I ever loved, Raymond ! Do you remem- 
ber that spring before she left me ? It’s stupid for a 
man to devote his whole life to one woman.” This 
was another side of life. 

Anne’s friends probably never talked about them- 
selves, perhaps they did not indulge in such adven- 
tures. Or if they spoke of them, it must be with an 
apologetic laugh. Already I almost shared Anne’s 
condescending attitude towards our friends- it was 
catching. On the other hand, by the age of thirty, 
I could imagine myself being more like them than 
like Anne, and by then her silence, indifference and 
reserve might suffocate me. There was a knock at 
the door. I quickly put on my pyjama top and 
called “G)me in!” Anne stood there, carefully 
holding a cup. 

“I thought you might like some coffee. How do 
you feel this morning?” 

“Very well,” I answered. “I’m afraid I was a 
bit tipsy last night.” 

“As you are each time you go out,” she began 


108 



to laugh. “But I must say, you were amusing. 
It was such a tedious evening.” 

I had forgotten the sun, and even my coffee. 
When I was talking to Anne, I was completely 
absorbed; I did not tliink of myself, and yet she was 
the only one who rnade me question my motives! 
Through her.I lived more intensely. 

“Cdcile, do you find people like the Webbs and 
the Dupuis entertaining?” 

“ Well, they usually .behave abominably, but they 
are funny.” 

She was watching a fly on the floor. Anne’s eye- 
lids were long and heavy; it was easy for her to look 
condescending. 

“Don’t you ever realise* how monotonous and 
dull their conversation is? Don’t those endless 
stories about girls, contracts and parties bore you?” 

“I’m afraid,” I answered, “that after ten years 
of convent life their lack of morals fascinates me.” 

I did not dare to add that I also liked it. 

“You left two yeai ago>” she said. “It’s not 
anything one can reason about, neither is it a ques- 
tion of morals; it has someth ng to do with one’s 
sensibility, a sixth sense.” 

I supposed I hadn’t got it. I saw clearly that I 
was lacking in this respect. 

“Anne,” I asked abruptly, “do you think lam 
intelligent?” 


109 



She began to laugh, surprised at the directness 
of my question. 

“ Of course you are ! Why do you ask ? ” 

“If I were an idiot, you’d say just the same 
thing,” I sighed. “I so often find your superiority 
6verpowering.” 

“It’s just a question of age,” slie amwered. “It 
would be a sad thing if I didn’t fc^el a little more self- 
as«5ured than you.” 

She laughed. I was" annoyed : 

“It wouldn’t necessarily be a bad thing.” 

“It would be a catastrophe,” she said. 

She suddenly dropped her bantering tone and 
looked ^e straight in the face. I at once felt ill-at- 
ea^e, and began to fidg^. Even to-day I cannot get 
used to people v^ho stare at you while they are talk- 
ing, or come very close to make quite sure that you 
are listening. IVIy only thought then is to escape 
from such proximity. I go on saying ‘yes’, while 
gradually edging away^ their insistence and indis- 
cretion enrage me. Wliat right have they to try 
to corner me ? Fortunately Anne did not resort to 
these tactics, but merely kept her eyes fixed on me, 
so that I could no longer continue to talk in the light- 
hearted vein I usually aifected. 

“ Do you know how men like Webb end up?” 

I thought: ‘And men like my father.’ 

“In the river,” I answered flippantly. 


no 



“ A time comes when they are no longer attractive 
or in good form. They can’t drink any more, and 
they still hanker after women, only then they have 
to pay and make compromises in order to escape 
from their loneliness: they have become just figures 
of fun. They grow^sentimental and hard to pleasf?. 
1 have seen njiany who have gone the same wav.” 

“Poor Webb!” I said. 

I was impressed So tliat was the fate in store 
for my father? Or at least the fate from which 
Anne was saving him. 

“You never thought of that, did jou?” said 
Anne, \^ith a little smile of commiseration. “You 
don’t think much abou" the future, do you? That 
is the privilege of joutli.” ‘ 

“Please don’t thiwv my youth at me like that! 
I use it neither as an excuse, nor a privilege. I 
just don’t attach any importance to it.” 

“To what do you attach importance? To your 
peace of mind? Your ind<-peiidence ?” 

I dreaded converse ions of this sort, especially 
with Anne. 

“To nothing at all,” I ‘ lid. “You know I 
hardly ever think."' 

“You and your father irritate me at times: ‘You 
haven’t given it a thought . . . you’re not worth 
much . . . you don’t know.’ Are you satisfied to 
be like that?” 


Ill 



‘‘Pm not satisfied with myself. I don’t like 
myself, and I don’t try to. At moments you force 
me to complicate my life, and I almost hate you for 
it.” 

She began to hum to herself with a thoughtful 
Expression. I recognised the tune, but did not 
know what it was : 

‘‘What’s the name of that song, Anne? It gets 
on my nerves.” 

“I doTi’t know,” she smiled again, looking rather 
discouraged. ‘^Stay in bed and rest. I’ll continue 
my research on the family intellect somewhere 
else.” 

I thought it was easy enough for my father. I 
could just imagine him raying ‘I’m not thinking of 
anything special because I love you, Anne.’ How- 
ever intelligent she was, Anne would accept this as 
a valid excuse. I gave myself a good stretch and 
lay down on my pillow. Anne was dramatising the 
situation: in twenty-five years my father would 
be an amiable sexagenarian with white hair, rather 
addicted to whisky and highly-coloured remini- 
scences. We would go out together j it would be 
my turn to tell him my adventures, and his to advise 
me. 1 realised that in my mind I was excluding 
Anne from our future : I did not see how she could 
fit in. Amidst the turmoil of our flat, which was 
sometimes bare, at others full of flowers, the stage 

112 



fOT many and varied scenes, often cluttered up with 
luggage, I somehow could not envisage the intro- 
duction of order, the peace and quiet, the feeling of 
harmony that Anne brought with her everywhere 
she went, as if they were the most precious gifts. I 
dreaded being bore^to death; althougli I was lesS 
apprehensive^ of her influence since my love for 
Cyril had liberated me from many of my fears. I 
feared boredom and tranquillity more than any- 
thing. In order to achieve serenity, my father and 
I had to have excitement, and this Anne ' as not 
prepared to admit. 


113 



9 


have spoken a great deal about Anne and my- 
I self, and very little of my father. Yet he has 
played the most important part in this story, 
and my feelings for him have been deeper and more 
stable than for anyone else. ■ I know him too well, 
and feel too close to him to talk easily of him, and it 
is he above all others whom I wish to justify and 
present in a good light. He was neither vain nor 
selfish, but incurably frivolous. I could not call 
him irresponsible or incapable of deep feelings. His 
love for me is not to be takei* lightly or regarded 
merely as a parental habit. He could suffer more 
through me than through anyone else, and for my 
part 1 was nearer to despair the day he turned away 
as if abandoning me than I had ever been in my 
life. I was always more important to him than his 
love affairs. On certain evenings, by taking me 
home, he must have missed what his friend Webb 
would have called ‘great opportunities’. On the 
other hand, I cannot deny that he was unfaithful 
and would always take the easiest way. He never 
reflected, and tried to give ever 3 rthing a physio- 
logical explanation which he called being rational: 

114 



“You think yourself hateful? Sleep more and 
drink less ! ” It was the same when at times he had 
a violent desire for a particular woman. He never 
thought of repressing it, or trying to elevate it into 
d complex sentiment. He was a materialist, but 
kind and understanding and had a touch of delicacy^ 
His desire fonElsa disturbed him, but not in the way 
one might expect. He did not say to himself: 

‘ I want to be unfaituful to \nne, therefore I 
love her less,’ but ‘This need for Elsa is a nuisance, 
I must gc* over it quickly or it might cause compli- 
cations with Anne.’ Moreover he loved and ad- 
mired Anne. She was a change from the stupid 
and frivolous women he had consorted with in 
recent years. She satisfied his vanity, his sensuality 
and his sensibility, for she understood him, and 
offered her intelligence and experience to supplo- 
nient his. But I do not believe he realised how 
deeply she cared for him. He thought of her as the 
ideal mistress and an ideal mother for me, but I do 
not think he visualise.’ her as the ideal wife for 
himself, with all this implied. I am sure that in 
Cyril’s and in Anne’s eyes he wc like me, abnormal, 
so to speak } but although he considered hi-, life banc-1, 
he put all his vitality into it and made it exciting. 

1 was not thinking of him when I formed the 
project of shutting Anne out of our lives; I knew he 
would console himself as he always did: a clean 

115 



break with Anne would in the long run be less pain- 
ful than living a well-regulated life as her husband. 
What really destroyed him, as it did me, was being 
subjected to fixed habits. We were of the same 
race; sometimes I thought we belonged to the pure 
bnd beautiful race of noir>ads„.and at others to the 
poor withered breed of hedonists. • 

At that moment he was suffering, or at least he 
was feeling exasperated : Elsa had become the symbol 
of his past life and of youth, above all of his own 
youth. I knew he was dying to say to Anne: 
“ Dearest, let me go for just one day; I must prove 
to myself with Elsa’s help that I’m not an old fogey.” 
But that was impossible; not because Anne was 
jealous, or too virtuous^’to discuss such matters, but 
because she had made up her mind to live with 
him on her own terms. She was determined to 
put an end to the era of frivolity and debauch and 
to slop him behaving like a schoolboy. She was 
entrusting her life to him and in future he must 
behave well and not be a slave to his caprices. One 
could not blame Anne : hers was a perfectly normal 
and sensible point of view, but it did not prevent 
my father from wanting Elsa — from desiring her 
more and more as time passed and his feeling of 
frustration increased. 

At that moment I have no doubt that I could have 
arranged everything. I had only to tell Elsa to go 

116 



and meet him and resume their former relations, 
and I could easily have persuaded Anne to go with 
me to Nice on some pretext. On our return we 
would have found my father relaxed, and filled with 
a new taste for legalised affections, or rather, those 
shortly to become l^alised. liut Anne could nof 
have borne tl\|B idea of having been merely a mis i ress 
like the others. Hov'^ difficult she made life for us 
through the high esteem in which she held herself! 

But 1 said nothing ta Elsa,* neither did I ask Anne 
to go to Nice with me. I wanted my father’s 
desire to fester in him, so that in the end he would 
give himself away. I could not bear the contempt 
with which Anne treated our past life, her disdain 
for what had been otir happiness. I had no wish 
to humiliate her, but only to force her to accept 
our way of life. For this it was necessary that she 
should discover his infidelity, und should see it 
objectively as a passing fancy, not as an attack on 
her personal dignity. Tf at all cost she wished to be 
in the right, she must allow us to be in the wong. 

I even pretended not to notice my father’s plight. 
On no account could I become his accomplice by 
speaking to Elsa for him, or getting Anne out of the 
way. I had to pretend to look upon Anne and his love 
for her as sacred, and I must admit it v^^as not difficult 
for me. The idea that he could be unfaithful and 
defy her filled me with terror and < . ague admiration. 

117 



In the meanwliile we had many happy days. I 
made use of every occasion to further my father’s 
interest in Elsa. The sight of Anne’s face no longer 
filled me with remorse. I sometimes imagined 
that sne would accept eveiything, and that we would 
he able to live a life that s iite^l us all three equally 
well. I often saw C}^ril, and we ryiade love m 
seci et The scent of the pines, and the sound of the 
sea added to the enclianlment He began to tor- 
ment Ininself, he hateJl thetrole I had foiced upon 
liirn, and only conlinued with it because I made him 
b(lie\e it was neces<;aiy for our love. All this 
invohed a great deal of deceit, and miicli had to be 
concealed, but it did not cost me much eifoit to tell 
a lew lies, and aftei all^ I alone contiolled, and was 
the sole judge of ni} actions 

I will pass quickl}^ over tins period, foi I am afiaid 
that il I look at it closely, I shall icvive memoiies 
that are too painful Ahead} 1 feel overwhelmed as 
I think of Anne’s happ} laugh, of lier kindn(‘ss to 
me. My conscience tioubles me so much at those 
moments that I am obliged to resoi t to some expedi- 
ent like lighting a cigaiette, putting on a recoid, or 
telephoning to a fiiend 1 hen gradually I begin to 
think of something else But I do not like having 
to take refuge in forgetfulness and fiivohty instead 
of fa<^ing ni} memoiies and fighting them. 


118 



10 


D estiny sometimes assumes strange forms. 
That summer it appeared in the guise of 
Elsa, a mediocre person, but with a pretty 
face. She had an extraordinary laugh, sudden and 
infectious, which only rather stupid people possess. 

I soon noticed the effect of this laugh on my 
father. I told her to make the utmost use of it 
whenever we ‘surprised’ her with Cyril. My 
orders were: “When you hear me coming with my 
father, say nothing, just laugh.” And at the sound 
of that laugh a look of fury would come into my 
father’s face. My r61e of stage manager continued 
to be exciting. I never missed my mark, for when 
we saw Cyril and Elsa openly showing signs of an 
imaginary relationship my father and I both grew 
pale with the violence of our feelings. The sight 
of Cyril bending over Elsa made my heart ache. I 
would have given anything in the world to stop 
them, forgetting that it was I who had planned it. 

Apart from these incidents and filling our daily 
life were Anne’s confidence, gentleness and (I hate 
to use the word) happiness. She was nearer to 
happiness than I had ever seen her since she had 

B.T. — 9 119 



been at our mercy, egoists that we were. She was 
far removed from our violent desires and my base 
little schemes. I had counted on her aloofness and 
instinctive pride preventing her from making any 
special effort to attach my father to her, and that she 
\^ou]d rely on looking beautiful, and being her 
intelligent, loving self. I began to feel sorry for 
her, and pity is an agreeable sentiment, moving, 
like military music. 

One fine morning the maM, in great excitement, 
handed me a note from Elsa: “ All is well. Come ! ” 
I had an impression of imminent catastrophe : I hate 
final scenes. 1 met EKa on the beach, looking 
triumphant. 

“At last I managed to speak to your father, just 
an hour ago.” 

“What did he say?” 

“lie told me he was very sorry for what had 
happened, that he had behaved like a cad. It’s the 
truth, isn’t it ?” 

I thought it best to agree. 

“Then he paid me compliinenls in the way only 
he can, you know, rather detached, in a low voice, 
as if at the same time it hurt him.” 

I interrupted her: “What was he leading up to ?” 

“Well, nothing. Oh yes, he asked me to have 
tea with him in the village to show there was no ill- 
feeling, and that I was broadminded. Shall I go ?” 

120 



My father’s views on the broadmindedness of 
red-haired girk were a treat. I felt like saying that 
it had nothing to do with me. Then I realised that 
she held me responsible for her success. Rightly 
or wrongly, it irritated me. I felt trapped. 

“I don’t know, •Elsa. That depends on you. 
You always &sk me what you should do, one might 
almost believe that it was I who forced you ...” 

“But it was you,” she said. “It’s entirely 
through you that . . . ’’ 

The admiration in her voice suddenly frightened 
me: 

“ Go if you want to, but for h<'aven’s sake, don’t 
say any more about it ! ” 

“But Cdcile, isn’t the whole idea to free him 
from that woman’s clutches?” 

I fled. Let my father do as he wished, and Anne 
must deal with it as best she could. Anyhow I was 
on my way to meet Cyril. It seemed to me that 
love was the only remedy for tlie haunting fear I felt. 

Cyril took me in liis arms without a word. Once 
I was with him, everj'thing ’..ccame quite simple. 
Later, lying beside him, 1 told him that I hated 
myself. I smiled as I said it because although I 
meant it, there was no pain, only a pleasant resigna- 
tion. He did not take me seriously : 

“What does it matter? I lo^e you so much that 
I shall make you feel as I do.” 


121 



All through our mid-day meal I thought of his 
words: “I love you so much.” That is why, 
although 1 have tried hard, I cannot remember 
much about that limch. Anne was wearing a 
mauve dress, as mauve as the shadows under her 
eyes; the colour of her eyes themselves. My 
father laughed, and was evidently well pleased 
with himself: everything was going well for him. 
During dessert he announced that he had some 
shopping to do in the village that afternoon. I 
smiled to myself. I was tired of the whole thing, 
and felt fatalistic about it. My one desire was to 
have a swim. 

At four o’clock I went down to the beach. I saw 
my father on the terrace about to leave for the vil- 
lage; I did not speak, not even to warn him to be 
careful. 

The water was soft and warm. Anne did not 
appear. I supposed she was busy in her room 
designing her next collection, and meanwhile my 
father was making the most of his time with Elsa. 
After two hours, when I was tired of sunbathing, I 
went up to the terrace and sitting down in a chair, 
opened a newspaper. 

At that moment Anne appeared from the direc- 
tion of the wood. She was running, clumsily, 
heavily, her elbows dose to her sides. I had a 
sudden, ghastly impression of an old woman running 

122 



towards me, and that she was about to fall down. I 
did not move; she disappeared behind the house 
near the garage. In a flash I understood, and I too 
began running to catch her. 

She was already in her car starting it up. I 
rushed over and clvAched at the door. 

“Anne,” ‘I cried. “Don’t go, it’s all a mistake, 
it’s my fault. I’ll explain everjrthing.” 

She paid no attention to jne, but bent to take the 
brake off. 

“Anne, we need you!” 

She straightened up, and I saw that her face was 
distorted: she was crying. Then I realised that I 
had attacked a living, sensitive creature, not just 
an entity. She too must once have been a rather 
secretive little girl, then an adolescent, and after 
that a woman. Now she was forty, and all alone. 
She loved a man, and had hoped to spend ten or 
twenty happy years with him. As for me . . . 
that poor miserable face was my work. I was petri- 
fied; I trembled all over as I leant against the 
door. 

“You have no need of anyone,” she murmured. 
“Neither you nor he.” 

The engine was running. I was desperate, she 
couldn’t go like that! 

“Forgive me! I beg you . .” 

“Forgive you? What for?” 


123 



The tears were streaming down her face. She 
did not seem to notice them. 

“ My poor child! ” 

She laid her hand against my cheek for a moment, 
then drove away. I saw her car disappearing round 
the side of the house. I v\ is ii*’etrievably lost. It 
had all happened so quickly. I thought of her face. 

I heard steps behind me : it was my father. He 
had taker the time to remove the imprint of Elsa’s 
lipstick from his face, and blush the pine needles 
from his suit. I turned round and threw m}5elf 
on him. 

“You beast!” 

1 began to sob. 

“But whdt’s the iiiatter? Where is Anne? 
Cikile, tell me, Cecile'” 


124 



11 


W e did iiotmieet again until dinner. Botli 
of* us were nervous at being suddenly 
alone together, and neither he nor 1 had 
any appetite. We realised^ it was necessary to get 
Anne back. I could rfot bear to think of the look of 
horror on her fdv.e before slie left, of her distress ami 
my own responsibility. All my cunning manoeu- 
vres and carefully laid plans were forgotten. 1 
was thrown completely off my balance, and I could 
see Irom his expression thatfny father felt the same. 

“Do you think,” he said, “that she’ll stay away 
from us for long?” 

“ I expect she’s gone to Paris,” I said. 

“ Paris,” murmured my father in a dreamy voice. 
“Perhaps we shall never see her again.” 

He seemed at a loss for w'ords, and took my hand 
across the table. 

“You must be terribly angry with me. I don’t 
know what came over me. On the way back 
through the woods I kissed Elsa, and just at that 
moment Anne must have arrived.” 

I was not listening. The figimes of Elsa and my 
father embi acing under the pii.es seemed theatrical 

125 



and imreal to me, and I could not visualise them. 
The only vivid memory of that day was my last 
glimpse of Anne’s face with its look of grief and 
betrayal. 

I took a cigarette from my father’s packet and 
lit it. Smoking during n’ealsi was a thing Anne 
could not bear. 

I smiled at my father: 

“I understand very yvell, it’s not your fault. It 
was a momentaiy lapse, as they say. But we must 
get Anne to forgive us, or rather you.” 

“What shall we do?” he asked me. 

He looked far from well. I felt sorry for him and 
for myself too. After all, what was Anne up to, 
leaving us in the lurch like that, making us suffer for 
one moment of folly ? Hadn’t she a duty towards us ? 

“Let’s write to her,” I said. “And £isk her for- 
giveness.” 

“What a wonderful idea,” said my father. 

At last he had found some means of escape from 
the stupor and remorse of the past three hours. 
Without waiting to finish our meal, we pushed 
back the cloth, my father went to fetch a lamp, 
pens, and some notepaperj we sat down opposite 
each other, almost smiling because our preparations 
had made Anne’s return seem probable. A bat 
was circling round outside the -window. My father 
started -writing. 

126 



An unbearable feeling of disgust and horror rises 
in me when I think of the letters full of fine senti- 
ments we wrote that evening, sitting under the 
lamp like two awkward schoolchildren, applying 
ourselves in silence to the impossible task of gettii^ 
Anne back. HoweVfer, we managed to produce two 
works of art* full of excuses, love, and repentance. 
When 1 had finished, I felt almost certain that Anne 
would not be able to resist us, and that a reconcilia- 
tion was imminent. I could already imagine the 
scene as she forgave us, it would take place in 
our drawing-room in Paris, Anne would come in 
and . . . 

At that moment the telephone rang. It was ten 
o’clock. We exchanged a look of astonishment 
which soon turned to hope; it was Anne telephoning 
to say she forgave us and was returning. My 
father bounded to the telephone and called “Hello” 
in a voice fvill of joy. 

Then he said nothing but “Yes, yes, where is 
that? yes” in an almost inaudible whisper. I got 
up, shaken by fear. My father passed his hand over 
his face with a mechanical gesture. At length he 
gently replaced the receiver and turned to me : 

“She has had an accident,” he said. “On the 
road to Estdrel. It took them some time to discover 
her address. They telephoned to Paris and got our 
number from there.” 


127 



He went on in the same flat voice, and I dar^d not 
interrupt : 

“The accident happened at the most dangerous 
spot. There have been many at that place, it seems. 
The car fell down fifty metres. It would have been 
a miracle if she had escapea ’’ 

The rest of that night I remember as If it had been 
a nightmare: the road surging up under the head- 
lights, my father’s stony face, the door of the clinic. 
My father would not let me see her. I sat on a 
bench in the waiting-room staring at a lithograph of 
Venice. I thought of nothing. A nurse told me 
that this w'as the sixth accident at that place sinc#^ 
the beginning of the summer. My father did not 
come back. 

Then I thought that once again by her death 
Anne had proved herself diflerent from us. If we 
had wanted to commit suicide, even supposing W'e 
had the courage, it would have been with a bullet 
in the head, leaving an explanatory note destined to 
trouble the sleep of those who were responsible. 
But Anne had made us the magnificent present of 
giving us the chance to believe in an accident. A 
dangerous place on the road, a car that easily lost bal- 
ance. It was a gift that w’^e would soon be weak 
enough to accept. In any case it is a romantic idea 
of mine to call it suicide. Can one commit suicide 
on account of people like my father and myself, 

128 



people who have no need of anybody, living or dead ? 
My father and I never spoke of it as anything but an 
accident. 

The next day we returned to the house at about 
three o’clock in the afternoon. Elsa and Cyril 
were waiting for uf, sitting on the steps. They 
seemed like tWo comic, forgotten characters; neither 
of them had known Anne, or loved her. 'I'licre 
they were wdth their little Jove affairs, their good 
looks, and their embarrassment. Cyril came up to 
me and put his hand on my arm. I looked at him: 
I had never loved him. I had found him gentle 
and attractive. I had loved the pleasure he gave 
me, but 1 did not need him. I was going away, 
leaving behind me the house, the garden, and that 
summer. My father was with me; he took my 
arm and we went indoors. 

In the house were Anne’s jacket, her flowers, her 
room, her scent. My father closed the shutters, 
took a bottle out of the refrigerator and fetched two 
glasses. It was the only remedy to hand. Our 
letters of excuse still lay on ;he table. I pushed 
them off and they floated to the floor. My father, 
who was coming towards me holding a full glass, 
hesitated, then avoided them. I found it symboli- 
cal. I took my glass and drained it in one gulp. The 
room was in half darkness, I saw my father’s shadow 
on the window. The sea was beating on the shore. 

129 



12 


T he funeral took plac° in* Paris on a fine day. 
1 here was the usual curious crowd dressed in 
black. My father and I shook hands with 
Anne’s elderly relatiops. I looked at them with 
interest, they would probrfbly hare come to tea 
with us once a jear. People commiserated with 
my father. Webb must have spread the news 
of his intended marriage. I saw that Cyril was 
looking for me after the service, but I avoided him. 
1 he resentment I felt towards him was quite 
unjustified, but I could not help it. Everyone was 
deploring the dreadful and senseless event, and as I 
was still rather doubtful whether it had been an 
accident, I was relieved. 

In the car on the way back, my father took my 
hand and held it tightly. I thought : ‘ Now we have 
only each other, we are alone and unhappy,’ and 
for the first time I cried. My tears were some com- 
fort, they were not at all hke the terrible emptiness 
I had felt in the clinic in front of the picture of 
Venice. My father gave me his handkerchief 
without a word, his face was ravaged. 

For a month we lived like a widower and an 


150 



orphan, eating all our meals together and staying at 
home. Sometimes we spoke of Anne: “Do you 
remember the day when We chose our words 

with care, and averted ovu* eyes for fear we might 
hurt each other, or that something irreparable 
would come betweeSi us. Our discretion and re- 
straint brought their own recompense. Soon we 
could speak of Anne in a normal way as of a person 
dear to us, with whom we qpuld have been happy, 
but whom God had (Sailed to Himself. God in- 
stead of chance. We did not believe in God. lu 
these circumstances we were thankful to believe in 
fate. 

Then one day at a friend’s house 1 met a young 
man I liked and who liked Ae. For a week I went 
out with him (X)nstantly, and my father, who could 
not bear to be alone, followed my example with an 
ambitious young woman. Life began to take its 
old course, as it was bound to. When my father 
and I were alone together vve joked, and discussed 
our latest (»nquests. He must suspect that my 
friendship with Philippe is not platonic, and I know 
very well that his new friend is <»sting him too 
much money. But we are happy. Winter is draw- 
ing to an end; we shall not rent the same villa again, 
but another one, near Juan-les-Pins. 

Only when I am in bed, at dawn, listening to /the 
cais passing below in the streets of Paris, my 

131 



memory betrays me: that summer returns to me 
with all its emotions. Anne, Anne, I repeat over 
and over again softly in he darkness. Then some- 
thing rises in me that . welcome by name, with 
closed eyes. Buiijour tristi>>se! 


132 